                                                                                                                                                                          2025-4-14



                                         Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level
                                         Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic
                                         Tree Search
                                         Yutaro Yamada1,* , Robert Tjarko Lange1,* , Cong Lu1,2,3,* , Shengran Hu1,2,3 , Chris Lu4 , Jakob Foerster4 , Jeff
                                         Clune2,3,5, and David Ha1,
                                         * Equal Contribution, 1 Sakana AI, 2 University of British Columbia, 3 Vector Institute, 4 FLAIR, University of Oxford, 5 Canada CIFAR

                                         AI Chair,  Equal Advising



                                         AI is increasingly playing a pivotal role in transforming how scientific discoveries are made. We introduce
                                         Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2, an end-to-end agentic system capable of producing the first entirely AI-
arXiv:2504.08066v1 [cs.AI] 10 Apr 2025




                                         generated peer-review-accepted workshop paper. This system iteratively formulates scientific hypotheses,
                                         designs and executes experiments, analyzes and visualizes data, and autonomously authors scientific
                                         manuscripts. Compared to its predecessor (v1, Lu et al., 2024), The AI Scientist-v2 eliminates the
                                         reliance on human-authored code templates, generalizes effectively across diverse machine learning
                                         domains, and leverages a novel progressive agentic tree-search methodology managed by a dedicated
                                         experiment manager agent. Additionally, we enhance the AI reviewer component by integrating a
                                         Vision-Language Model (VLM) feedback loop for iterative refinement of content and aesthetics of the
                                         figures. We evaluated Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 by submitting three fully autonomous manuscripts to
                                         a peer-reviewed ICLR workshop. Notably, one manuscript achieved high enough scores to exceed the
                                         average human acceptance threshold, marking the first instance of a fully AI-generated paper successfully
                                         navigating a peer review. This accomplishment highlights the growing capability of AI in conducting all
                                         aspects of scientific research. We anticipate that further advancements in autonomous scientific discovery
                                         technologies will profoundly impact human knowledge generation, enabling unprecedented scalability
                                         in research productivity and significantly accelerating scientific breakthroughs, greatly benefiting society
                                         at large. We have open-sourced the code at https://github.com/SakanaAI/AI-Scientist-v2 to
                                         foster the future development of this transformative technology. We also discuss the role of AI in science,
                                         including AI safety.


                                         1. Introduction
                                         Automated scientific discovery empowered by artificial intelligence (AI) has garnered considerable
                                         attention in recent years (Cornelio et al., 2023; Gil et al., 2014; King et al., 2009; Kitano, 2021; Wang
                                         et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2021). The development of end-to-end frameworks capable of autonomously
                                         formulating hypotheses, performing experiments, analyzing results, and authoring manuscripts could
                                         fundamentally transform the scientific process. A notable recent advance in this direction is The AI
                                         Scientist-v1 (Lu et al., 2024), which demonstrated the feasibility of a fully automated scientific
                                         workflow and downstream manuscript production. However, significant limitations constrained its
                                         broad applicability and autonomy. Specifically, it relied heavily on human-authored code templates
                                         requiring manual effort to create a new template for each new topic area. Furthermore, its linear and
                                         shallow experimentation approach prevented deeper exploration of scientific hypotheses.
                                         In this paper, we introduce The AI Scientist-v2, a substantially improved successor that directly
                                         addresses these limitations. Our contributions are threefold. First, we eliminate the dependency
                                         on human-provided code templates, significantly increasing the system’s autonomy and ability to
                                         be deployed out of the box across multiple machine learning domains. Second, we introduce an
                                         experiment manager agent coupled with a novel agentic tree-search algorithm, enabling deeper and


                                         Corresponding author(s): Yutaro Yamada (yutaroyamada@sakana.ai), Robert Tjarko Lange (robert@sakana.ai), and Cong Lu
                                         (cong@sakana.ai).
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



Table 1 | Comparison of AI Scientist Versions. Comparison highlights key advancements in The AI
Scientist-v2, including autonomous code generation via tree search, enhanced VLM integration
for feedback during experiments and manuscript review, and evaluation through formal peer review.

 Feature                        Codebase          Execution         Parallel          VLM                  Human Result
                                Drafting          Planning        Experiments       Reviewer                Evaluation
 The AI Sci e ntis t-v1      Topic-Specific         Linear               ✗               ✗               Not Submitted
 The AI Sci e ntis t-v2     Domain-General        Tree-Based             ✓               ✓         Workshop Acceptance-Worthy



more systematic exploration of complex hypotheses. Third, we enhance the reviewing and refinement
stages by integrating a Vision-Language Model (VLM)-based feedback mechanism, improving the
quality, clarity, and alignment of generated figures, captions, and text interpretation. To rigorously
evaluate the capabilities and limitations of fully autonomous manuscript generation, we conducted
a controlled experiment: three manuscripts entirely generated by Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 were
submitted to a peer-reviewed workshop at ICLR. Remarkably, one manuscript achieved an average
reviewer score of 6.33 (placing it roughly in the top 45% of submissions) and would have been
accepted after meta-review were it human-generated, thus becoming the first fully AI-generated
manuscript to successfully pass a peer-review process.
The accepted paper investigates whether incorporating an explicit compositional regularization term
into neural network training can improve compositional generalization. Specifically, it penalizes large
deviations between embeddings of successive time steps in sequence models, hypothesizing that
this encourages compositionality. The approach is evaluated using synthetic arithmetic expression
datasets, but it is found that compositional regularization does not yield significant improvements
and occasionally harms performance. The workshop reviewers appreciated the paper for clearly
identifying the challenges of effective compositional regularization and reporting on negative results.
However, they collectively highlighted shortcomings, including insufficient justification and intuitive
explanations for why the chosen regularization method would enhance compositionality. Our personal
assessment (detailed further in §4) highlights several additional potential improvements in method
description (e.g., making clear exactly which component of the network is being regularized), potential
dataset overlap issues, and inaccuracies in figure captions. Overall, reviewers viewed the paper as an
interesting and technically sound workshop contribution that needs further development and broader
experimentation to reach conference-level rigor.
This report provides an in-depth outline of the developed methodological advances, analysis of the
workshop-submitted papers, and a discussion on the ethical and safety considerations of systems like
The AI Scie n t i s t - v 2. Our overall contributions are as follows:
  1. We introduce The AI Scientist-v2, an automated scientific discovery framework enhanced
     by agentic tree search, VLM feedback, and parallel experiment execution. It thereby significantly
     improves the autonomy, flexibility, and scientific exploration depth of previous systems.
  2. We demonstrate, for the first time, that an AI-generated manuscript can successfully pass peer
     review at a recognized machine learning workshop, marking a critical milestone for AI science.
  3. We conduct comprehensive internal evaluations and analyses of both peer-review feedback and
     our system’s outputs, providing insights into the strengths, weaknesses, and current status of
     AI-generated manuscripts relative to traditional human-authored scientific publications.
  4. We open-source the full codebase for Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 and the ICLR 2025 workshop
     experiment data, encouraging further exploration by the research community and advancing a
     discussion regarding AI’s evolving role in science–in the open.




                                                                                                                                2
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




Figure 1 | Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 Workflow. The workflow consists of several phases covering
automated idea generation, experiment execution, figure visualization, manuscript writing, and
reviewing. Unlike the initial version, Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 removes the dependency on human-
coded templates. Instead, it employs agentic tree search (managed by an Experiment Progress
Manager across several stages, orange) to generate and refine code implementations. Subsequent
experimentation leverages the best-performing code checkpoints (nodes) from the tree search to
iteratively test various research hypotheses.


2. Background
The AI Scientist-v1 (Lu et al., 2024) introduced the first AI system that entirely automates scien-
tific discovery and the presentation of its results. Given a baseline code template, it autonomously wrote
code, executed experiments, visualized outcomes, and produced a complete scientific manuscript.
However, despite representing a significant step forward, Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 was subject to
limitations. Foremost among these was its reliance on human-crafted baseline code templates, signifi-
cantly constraining its autonomy and hindering unconstrained out-of-the-box deployability. Instead,
human effort was still required to draft an initial base experiment outline in code. Additionally, the
experimentation process followed a strictly linear hypothesis-testing routine, limiting depth and
exploration flexibility, especially when addressing complex research questions.
Language Model Agent Scaffolding. To further enhance LLM performance on complex reasoning
tasks, researchers have developed agentic scaffolding frameworks, each with distinct advantages
and limitations. For example, Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2024) enables models to iteratively reflect
on previous responses, encouraging self-improvement through critical evaluation of past outputs;
it improves robustness, but can introduce computational overhead and slower inference. Another
promising direction is the integration of tree-search strategies with LLMs (Jiang et al., 2025), allow-
ing structured exploration of reasoning paths. This approach enhances systematic reasoning and
comprehensiveness, though at the cost of increased complexity, higher computational demands, and
challenges in scalability.
Tree Search with Large Language Models. We empirically observed that automated research
conducted by The AI Scientist-v1 often resulted in short-sighted experimentation. The human-
driven scientific process, on the other hand, relies on open-ended hypothesis generation, stepping-
stone collection, and iterative hypothesis refinement. Recent advances using code generation as
an action space have opened new opportunities for LLM-driven automated workflows (Wang et al.,
2024). AIDE (Jiang et al., 2025) combines LLM-based code generation with tree search, demon-


                                                                                                                       3
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



strating state-of-the-art performance on the MLEBench benchmark (Chan et al., 2025), designed for
machine learning engineering tasks. In AIDE, each node represents a potential solution state with a
corresponding scalar evaluation score (e.g., validation accuracy). Nodes are iteratively selected for
further debugging or refinement based on these scores. Inspired by this approach, we integrate a
similar tree search-based exploration strategy within our automated scientific discovery framework,
adapting it specifically to the multi-stage nature of scientific experimentation, as detailed in §3.

3. Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2
We now describe the major innovations introduced in Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 relative to Th e A I
Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 (Lu et al., 2024). The most significant improvement is the move towards greater
autonomy and generalization, starting a more general idea generation phase (§3.1) and eliminating
the reliance on fixed, human-authored template code for experimentation. This process begins with
generalized idea generation, producing an initial concept, which then feeds into the experimentation
phase (§3.2). To manage this, we introduce two critical features in the experimentation phase:
coarse-grained experiment management and agentic tree search-based exploration. Additionally, we
integrate Vision Language Models (VLMs) into the experimental and review phases (§3.4). Finally,
we streamline the manuscript writing phase by replacing the incremental, Aider-based (Gauthier,
2024) iterative writing approach of The AI Scientist-v1 with a simpler, single-pass generation
followed by a separate reflection stage powered by reasoning models such as o1 (OpenAI, 2024). We
include a full list of sampling hyperparameters and models used in Appendix A and the prompts used
for The AI Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 in Appendix B.

3.1. More General Idea Generation
A key conceptual shift in Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 is the approach to research idea generation.
Unlike the predecessor system, which primarily focused on proposing incremental modifications or
extensions based on an existing codebase, The AI Scientist-v2 adopts a process that begins at a
higher level of abstraction. The system is prompted to engage in more open-ended thinking about
potential research directions, hypotheses, and experimental designs, akin to formulating a research
abstract or grant proposal before committing to a specific implementation.
This approach encourages the exploration of potentially more novel or foundational ideas, rather
than being constrained by the structure and topics of pre-existing code. It aligns more closely with
how researchers often develop broader research visions, starting with abstract concepts and assessing
novelty and feasibility before diving into specific implementations. Crucially, this generalized idea
generation phase integrates literature review tools, such as Semantic Scholar, in the loop. The system
can query the literature database during the idea formulation process to assess the novelty of a
proposed concept and identify relevant prior work. This allows for more informed decisions about
pursuing a particular research avenue, ensuring ideas are grounded in the existing scientific landscape
from the outset, rather than relying solely on post-hoc checks.

3.2. Removing Template Dependency
Following the improved idea generation phase, Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 proceeds with experimen-
tation. Beyond the code-conditioned idea generation, Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 also depended on
the predefined template code as a starting baseline implementation. The LLM-driven code changes
were then limited to sequential code adaptations. We now outline our strategy for eliminating this
limitation, thus improving the system’s flexibility and autonomy.

3.2.1. Experiment Progress Manager
Real-world scientific experimentation typically proceeds through distinct stages, from initial feasibility
assessments to detailed ablation analyses. To emulate this structured approach, we introduce an


                                                                                                                       4
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



experiment progress manager agent that coordinates four clearly defined stages of scientific
experimentation:
Stage 1 Preliminary Investigation: Establishing initial feasibility and correctness through a minimal
        working prototype based on the generated research idea.
Stage 2 Hyperparameter Tuning: Refining the initial implementation by optimizing critical hyper-
        parameters (e.g., learning rate, epochs) to create a robust experimental baseline.
Stage 3 Research Agenda Execution: Systematically implementing the core research agenda based
        on the tuned baseline.
Stage 4 Ablation Studies: Systematically assessing the importance of various research components,
        providing rigorous support for the main experimental findings.
Each stage has explicit stopping criteria. Stage 1 concludes when a basic working prototype is
successfully executed. Stage 2 ends when experiments stabilize, as indicated by convergence in
training curves and successful execution across at least two datasets. Stages 3 and 4 conclude when
the allocated computational budget is exhausted. Stage 3 also includes a check for experiment
duration–if runs finish much faster than the pre-allocated runtime, the system suggests increasing the
complexity of experiments.
After each stage, the experiment manager selects the best-performing node using a dedicated LLM
evaluator (see next section) based on clearly articulated criteria. This selected node is then carried
forward to seed the subsequent experimentation stage. The manager also records checkpoints at each
stage’s completion. To ensure scientific rigor and reproducibility, the experiment manager launches
multiple replications of the selected best experiments at the conclusion of each stage. These repeated
runs provide statistics (mean and standard deviation) for figures and reported results.

3.2.2. Parallelized Agentic Tree Search
Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 operated strictly linearly, where each code refinement directly built on
the immediately preceding experiment. In contrast, The AI Scientist-v2 adopts a significantly
more flexible and exploratory approach inspired by recent successes in integrating tree search with
LLM-driven workflows (Chan et al., 2025; Jiang et al., 2025; Wijk et al., 2024) and research on open-
endedness (Clune, 2019; Mouret and Clune, 2015). We incorporate this agentic tree search approach
across all four experimentation stages outlined in §3.2.1, enabling deeper and more systematic
exploration of scientific hypotheses.
Each experimental node within our tree-based framework undergoes the following execution cycle:
An LLM first generates both a concrete experimentation plan and the associated Python code to
implement the experiment. The generated code is immediately executed in a Python interpreter.
If execution encounters an error, the error message is recorded, and the node is marked as buggy,
ending the current execution cycle for that node. If execution succeeds, the experiment proceeds to
the plotting phase.
During each experiment, the system is instructed to save all relevant experimental outputs (training
and validation metrics, losses, etc.) into structured numpy files. In the plotting phase, Th e A I
Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 reads these stored results and the code, generating visualizations that summarize
and illustrate the findings clearly. These visualizations are subsequently passed to a Vision-Language
Model (VLM) for critique. Any issues flagged by the VLM (such as unclear labels, missing legends, or
misleading visualizations) result in the node being marked as buggy, and this feedback is recorded
for future debugging. Nodes that successfully execute and pass the VLM review without issue are
designated as non-buggy.
We define each node as a collection comprising an experiment script (e.g., a Python file), a textual



                                                                                                                       5
               Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




    Stage 1: Preliminary Investigation                  Stage 2: Hyperparameter Tuning
                                                                                                             Non-buggy nodes

                                                                                                             Buggy nodes



                                                                                                             Hyperparameter nodes

                                                                                                             Ablation nodes

                                                                                                             Replication nodes

                                                                                                             Aggregation nodes

   Stage 3: Research Agenda Execution                       Stage 4: Ablation Studies                        Best nodes




                                                                                                                   Refinement



                                                                                                                   Debugging




Figure 2 | The AI Scientist-v2 workflow showing different stages of tree-based experimentation.
Stage 1 begins at the root node, where initial experiment code is generated in parallel. After running
the experiment code and visualization scripts, each node is classified based on the outcome: if an error
occurs, it is marked as a buggy node; otherwise, it is labeled as a non-buggy node. New child nodes
are created differently depending on their parent node’s status: For non-buggy nodes, refinement is
applied to improve the experiment code for better performance. For buggy nodes, the system attempts
to debug them using stored error information. A best-performing node, selected by LLM-based
evaluation, is passed down as the root node of Stage 2. From this root node, child nodes are created
for hyperparameter tuning. The top-performing node from Stage 2 is then used to initialize Stage
3, where the system executes the research agenda, applies refinements, and performs debugging
as needed. In Stage 4, similar to Stage 2, the root node generates ablation nodes. Additionally,
replication nodes repeat the same experiment as their parent node, while aggregation nodes collect
results from replication nodes to generate combined visualizations and summaries.




                                                                                                                                    6
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



description of the high-level plan implemented in the script, an execution error trace (if applicable),
experiment runtime, performance metrics recorded during the experiment, feedback from an LLM
after running the script, a visualization script, file paths to the generated figures, feedback from a
VLM on those figures, and the node’s final status (either buggy or non-buggy).
At each iteration, the system selects several nodes from the existing tree to expand in parallel. With a
predefined probability, a buggy node is chosen (thus prioritizing error resolution and debugging);
otherwise, a non-buggy node is selected for further refinement and improvement. When choosing
between non-buggy nodes, the system uses a best-first search strategy, guided by an LLM that
evaluates candidates based on factors like performance metrics, training dynamics, and the quality
of generated plots. The selected nodes are expanded by creating a new child node that may either
attempt debugging if the parent node was buggy, or refine and improve upon the previous experiment
if the parent was non-buggy. An LLM is used to generate the plan and experiment code for each new
child node, after which all new nodes are executed concurrently in parallel, significantly accelerating
the exploration process. In addition to buggy and non-buggy nodes, we introduce specialized node
variants tailored to specific experimental needs:
   • Hyperparameter nodes systematically explore alternative hyperparameter configurations
     during Stage 2. The system maintains careful records of previously tested hyperparameters,
     preventing redundant experiments. Errors encountered during hyperparameter tuning trigger
     the creation of corresponding debug nodes.
   • Ablation nodes evaluate crucial ablation studies during Stage 4, assessing the importance of
     various components or assumptions underlying the experiment. Similar to hyperparameter
     nodes, previously tested ablation conditions are tracked to avoid repetition, and debugging
     nodes are created in response to any encountered errors.
   • Replication nodes execute replicates of their parent experiments using different random seeds.
     Typically, several replication nodes are created to enable the calculation of statistical measures
     (mean and standard deviation) of experimental outcomes, enhancing result robustness.
   • Aggregation nodes are special nodes created to consolidate and visualize the combined results of
     replication nodes. Unlike other node types, aggregation nodes do not conduct new experiments
     but simply generate a Python script to aggregate and summarize prior results, producing figures
     that explicitly show means and standard deviations.
The structured design of experiment stages and tailored node types facilitates systematic exploration
across all stages. Unlike some LLM agents that rigidly follow predefined, fine-grained workflow graphs,
our approach adopts a looser structure that guides the entire empirical research cycle, enabling flexible
system behavior while maintaining coherence across iterative stages.

3.3. Dataset Loading via Hugging Face
Most empirical machine learning research relies heavily on publicly available datasets. Hugging Face
Hub provides a convenient and unified framework for accessing a wide variety of commonly used
datasets, complete with predefined train, validation, and test splits. In The AI Scientist-v2, we
prompt the system to leverage Hugging Face Hub whenever possible, automatically downloading
required datasets using the standard one-line function (datasets.load_dataset). While this
standardized approach greatly simplifies dataset handling, we acknowledge it is somewhat ad-hoc, as
not all dataset repositories support this method.

3.4. Vision-Language Model Reviewer
Unlike Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1, which did not leverage Vision Language Models (VLMs), Th e
A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 incorporates VLMs at two phases of the research workflow: First, during the
tree-based experimentation phase, VLMs provide immediate feedback on generated figures, ensuring


                                                                                                                       7
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



that these visualizations effectively and accurately communicate experimental results. Second, during
the manuscript writing reflection stage, VLMs evaluate figures and their captions, enhancing the
visual clarity and coherence of the resulting paper.
In the paper-writing process, we extract screenshots of figures alongside their captions and the
corresponding text from the paper that references them (identified by the keyword “Figure X”). These
images and textual references are then provided to the VLM, which performs multiple quality checks,
including verifying the alignment between figures and captions, identifying issues with visual clarity
(e.g., missing legends, unclear labels), and detecting potential duplication of figures in the main text
and appendix. Through the iterative integration of VLM feedback, we significantly enhance the visual
quality and clarity of manuscripts generated by Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2.

4. Human Evaluation of Manuscripts Generated by The AI Scientist-v2




Figure 3 | Peer-reviewed ICBINB workshop paper generated by Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2. The
paper investigates the usage of a temporal consistency regularizer on the embeddings of an LSTM-
based sequence model. The results discuss the effect of the regularizer on compositional regularization
and highlight the difficulty of training models capable of improved generalization. It received peer-
review scores of 6 (weak accept), 7 (accept), and 6 (weak accept) before meta-review and ranked
among the top 45% submitted workshop papers.

To rigorously evaluate the capabilities and limitations of our automated scientific discovery system, we
conducted a human evaluation study in collaboration with the organizers of the ICLR 2025 workshop,
“I Can’t Believe It’s Not Better” (ICBINB). As detailed below, our evaluation included submitting fully
automated manuscripts generated by The AI Scientist-v2 to the official peer-review process of
the workshop.

4.1. Evaluation Methodology
Our evaluation process involved the following carefully controlled steps:


                                                                                                                       8
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



1. AI-Generated Submissions: We generated three complete manuscripts using only Th e A I
   Sc i e n t i s t - v 2, starting from broad topical prompts aligned with the workshop’s scope via the
   generalized idea generation process (§3.1). After the initial topic definition, the entire scientific
   workflow—hypothesis formulation, experiment design, coding, data analysis, visualizations, and
   manuscript writing—was executed autonomously, without any human intervention or editing.
2. Blind Peer Review: The three AI-generated submissions were included among the 43 total
   submissions received by the ICBINB workshop. Reviewers were informed in advance that some
   submissions might be AI-generated, but were not told which submissions were produced by The AI
   Scientist-v2. Reviewers could also opt out of reviewing potentially AI-generated manuscripts.
3. Review Outcomes and Acceptance Decisions: Among the three manuscripts produced by The
   AI Scientist-v2, one manuscript achieved a sufficiently high average reviewer score (6.33 out
   of 10, with individual scores of 6, 6, and 7) to surpass the workshop’s acceptance threshold. The
   remaining two submissions received lower scores and were not accepted.
4. Post-Review Withdrawal: Prior to the workshop submission, we arranged with the workshop
   organizers and ICLR leadership that any accepted AI-generated manuscripts would be withdrawn
   after the review process. This decision was made to avoid prematurely setting a precedent for
   purely AI-generated research entering the official scientific record without broader community
   discussion and consensus. Reviewers were informed of the experiment only after peer review.
In addition to the official workshop peer reviews, we also conducted a thorough internal evaluation
of all three AI-generated manuscripts. Our internal review carefully examined the experimental
rigor, clarity of presentation, methodological soundness, and novelty of the generated manuscripts.
We concluded that none of the manuscripts met the quality standards typical of top-tier main-track
conferences. However, we thought that one submission was indeed sufficiently compelling to receive
acceptance at the workshop level, and this is the same manuscript the workshop peer review process
accepted. This outcome provides encouraging evidence that manuscripts autonomously generated
by The AI Scientist-v2 can produce research on par with top-tier Machine Learning workshop
papers (see detailed internal analyses in §4.2).
Observations and Insights. Our internal inspection of the generated experiments and code revealed
several noteworthy limitations. First, The AI Scientist-v2 occasionally introduced inaccuracies
in citations, similar to the well-known “hallucination” issue encountered in large language models.
Second, while the system successfully executed standard experimental pipelines, it sometimes lacked
the detailed methodological rigor and in-depth analysis typically required for acceptance at leading
main conferences. However, such limitations did not prevent acceptance at the workshop level.
Transparency and Ethical Considerations. We believe it is crucial for the scientific community
to engage openly and transparently with AI-generated research, subjecting it to the same rigorous
peer-review processes applied to human-authored work. However, responsible oversight is essential.
In conducting this evaluation, we obtained IRB approval from the University of British Columbia
(H24-02652). We ensured full transparency and coordination with ICLR leadership and the workshop
organizers. Before the review process, reviewers were explicitly informed that some submissions
could be AI-generated and offered the option to opt out. Following acceptance, we withdrew the
AI-generated manuscript prior to publication, which is consistent with our commitment to avoid
prematurely inserting purely AI-generated works into the official scientific record without broader
community discussion. We emphasize that the community has not yet reached a consensus on
integrating AI-generated research into formal scientific publications, making careful and transparent
experimentation essential at this preliminary stage. Additionally, we believe that all AI-generated
papers should be clearly labeled as such in any public arena, and in Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 and
The AI Scie n t i s t - v 2 always make sure to do so.



                                                                                                                       9
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



4.2. The first AI-generated peer-reviewed workshop paper.
Paper Generation Process. The generation process for the workshop-accepted paper began with
the generalized idea generation phase (§3.1), prompted with the workshop’s theme (ICBINB’s focus
on negative results and unexpected findings) extracted from the official website. In this phase, the
system generated around twenty potential research ideas, all centered on core machine learning
topics. To encourage a more applied perspective, we then modified the system prompt to focus on
ideas involving the use of deep learning in real-world domains such as finance, psychology, agriculture,
environmental science, and public health. This second phase produced another set of roughly twenty
research ideas. From this combined AI-generated pool, we selected the three most promising initial
ideas–two from the first batch, and one from the second batch–based on alignment with the workshop
theme and potential interest, focusing on topics representing distinct research directions. This initial
idea selection step allowed us to manage computational resources by choosing which distinct, AI-
generated starting points to explore further with the full system. It did not involve modifying the
ideas themselves. All three generated ideas resulted in a workshop-submitted paper (included in
full in Appendix C). For each selected idea, the system autonomously executed the full experimental
pipeline using the parallelized agentic tree search (§3.2.2) multiple times, each initiated with a
different random seed. From the multiple complete manuscripts generated for each initial idea (i.e.,
one manuscript per seed), we selected the single best-resulting manuscript for submission based on
a careful inspection of its overall coherence and scientific quality. This process mimics a professor
reviewing the work of many students or teams and deciding which work is ready to be submitted
for peer review. Our current study aims to see whether Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 can produce at
least one paper that survives peer review, and not what fraction of the time it can do so. That is an
interesting question for future work and is likely best done after additional improvements are made in
the next generation of The AI Scientist. In the reflection stage of the writeup for each run, The
AI Scientist-v2 is prompted with the target page lengths (e.g., the 4-page limit for the workshop)
alongside the current length of the compiled PDF. This allowed the system to ensure that the final
output adhered to submission guidelines without manual text editing within that specific run.
Crucially, while humans initiated the process by providing the high-level workshop theme and selected
which initial AI-generated ideas to run multiple times through the full pipeline (akin to deciding
which experiments to fund or prioritize), and subsequently selected the most promising complete
output from those multiple runs, the entire process within any single run—hypothesis refinement,
code generation, execution, analysis, visualization, and writing—was performed autonomously by
Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2. No human edited the generated code, experimental results, figures, or
manuscript text of the selected final manuscript. The selection of initial ideas from the AI’s output,
the execution of multiple seeds, the subsequent selection of the best complete run, and the automated
handling of length constraints represent high-level experimental setup and process management
(meta-selection from fully autonomous outputs), not human-in-the-loop intervention in the scientific
content generation of the chosen manuscript. The system, if run for sufficiently many seeds, would
have generated similar outputs, requiring only the final selection step to be performed by humans.
Even this could have been avoided were we willing to send all generated papers to peer review,
which we did not want to do. Therefore, all submitted content was entirely generated by Th e A I
Scientist-v 2.
Workshop-Accepted Paper Content. The paper investigates the use of compositional regularization
to improve generalization in neural networks. The AI Scientist-v2 proposes adding an explicit
regularization term to the training loss function, encouraging networks to develop compositional
representations to encourage representations to not change much over time while processing inputs.
However, contrary to its expectations, experiments using synthetic arithmetic expression datasets
revealed that this approach did not significantly enhance generalization performance. In fact, com-



                                                                                                                       10
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



positional regularization sometimes hindered model training. Furthermore, increasing arithmetic
expression complexity made generalization even worse, irrespective of regularization. The paper
concludes that explicitly enforcing compositional structures via regularization alone may not be
sufficient and highlights potential conflicts between compositional regularization and the primary
learning objective. It recommends future exploration of alternative regularization methods and
different architectural approaches to better address compositional generalization issues. We provide
the full annotated paper in Appendix C.

   Initial Idea for the Workshop-Accepted Paper
   "Title": "Enhancing Compositional Generalization in Neural Networks via Compositional
   Regularization",
   "Short Hypothesis": "Introducing a compositional regularization term during training can
   encourage neural networks to develop compositional representations, thereby improving their
   ability to generalize to novel combinations of known components.",
   "Experiments": [
       "Implement the compositional regularization term and integrate it into the loss function of
       standard sequence-to-sequence neural network architectures with attention mechanisms.",
       "Train models on synthetic datasets like SCAN and COGS, evaluating performance on
       compositional generalization tasks with and without the regularization term.",
       "Apply the method to real-world tasks such as machine translation using the IWSLT dataset
       and semantic parsing with the GeoQuery dataset, assessing improvements in generalization to
       new language constructs.",
       "Analyze the learned representations by visualizing embedding spaces and utilizing
       compositionality metrics to assess how the regularization affects internal
       representations.",
       "Conduct ablation studies to determine the impact of different strengths of the
       regularization term, identifying the optimal balance between enforcing compositionality and
       maintaining overall performance.",
       "Compare the proposed method against other approaches aimed at improving compositional
       generalization, such as meta-learning techniques and specialized architectures."
   ],
   ]


Paper Assessment by the Authors. In our review, we evaluated the technical aspects of this paper
and identified several strengths and weaknesses. We appreciated the exploration of temporal consis-
tency regularization—penalizing large changes in embedding representations between successive
tokens—as an interesting method to enhance compositional generalization. The synthetic arithmetic
task chosen by the authors was appropriate, providing a suitable setting to test their hypothesis
across varying levels of complexity. However, we noted several areas requiring improvement. First,
the description of the regularization term was unclear and potentially misleading, as readers might
incorrectly assume it was applied to the LSTM hidden states rather than input embeddings. We
recommended clarifying this explicitly by adding a code appendix or conducting additional ablations
applying the regularization to LSTM hidden states. Second, the paper omitted key references, notably
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997), and instead relied on general textbook citations. Additionally,
we found inaccuracies in some figures and descriptions: specifically, the caption of Figure 3 incorrectly
interpreted validation loss, and Figure 5’s attention-based model clearly outperformed the LSTM
model, contradicting the authors’ claims. Furthermore, we found the experimental evaluation limited,
as the tasks were restricted to short sequences and synthetic data. We suggested extending the
evaluation to include real-world tasks, longer sequences, larger models, and a deeper analysis.
Our examination of the code revealed potential issues with dataset overlap—approximately 57%
overlap between training and test sets—which could significantly affect the reliability of the results.
Additionally, we identified confusion in the paper’s terminology regarding “embedding states” versus
“hidden states,” which should be clarified for precision. We also questioned the reported 100% accuracy
of the attention-augmented LSTM model, as our additional tests indicated that this performance was
primarily due to task simplicity and significantly decreased when task complexity increased. Overall,



                                                                                                                       11
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



we considered the paper technically sound and a borderline accept for the workshop, acknowledging
its valuable insights and intriguing ideas. However, we concluded it lacks sufficient depth and rigor
for acceptance into a full conference without addressing the highlighted concerns.
Paper Assessment by Human Workshop Reviewers. The reviewers generally agree that the paper
addresses an important topic—compositional generalization in neural networks and appreciate the
authors’ proposed compositional regularization method, as well as their detailed analysis of unexpected
results. All reviewers recognize the paper’s strength in clearly presenting why the regularization term
does not yield the anticipated improvements, emphasizing its informative negative results. However,
the reviewers highlight several areas for improvement:
Justification and Intuition: All reviewers suggest the need for clearer justification or intuition behind
why penalizing large changes between successive hidden states might improve compositionality. They
recommend adding references to related works, theoretical motivations, or visual explanations to
strengthen the rationale.
Network Architecture Generalization: Reviewers emphasize that since only the LSTM architecture
was evaluated, the findings should not be generalized across all neural network types. They suggest
experimenting with additional architectures, such as transformers, to better understand the impact of
the regularization across different neural network models.
Experimental Breadth: Reviewers suggest extending the evaluation to other tasks or datasets beyond
synthetic arithmetic expressions to further validate the generalizability of the conclusions.
Overall: The reviewers recommend acceptance to the workshop due to the paper’s insightful ex-
ploration and clear analysis despite its negative results. They encourage further elaboration on
methodological motivations, additional experimental evaluations, and clearer connections between
compositional regularization and the complexity of compositional tasks. The paper received scores of
6 (weak accept), 7 (accept), and 6 (weak accept). Below, we include two of the reviews for which
we obtained explicit permission from the reviewers to include them in our report. The remaining
reviewer did not respond to our request.

   Reviewer #1: A good paper analyzing the effectiveness of a compositional regularization term for LSTMs

   Summary: The authors propose a regularisation term to enhance compositional regularisation in
   neural networks. The idea is to penalise large deviations between subsequent time steps of the
   hidden state, thus “squeezing” the hidden state to encourage composition and preventing a
   dominating representation. The authors test their approach on synthetic arithmetic expression
   with varying operator complexity and length. They show that although the regularisation term
   appears to be working, it counterintuitively does not improve test accuracy. Furthermore, the
   authors identify a bottleneck regarding network capacity with increasing arithmetic operators.

   Strengths:
   I find the idea of regularising or squeezing the hidden representations to encourage
   compositionally an interesting idea. The authors define a good baseline and ablate their method
   well against it, revealing why the regularisation term does not work as expected. I think the
   insight that operator complexity is a bottleneck for the neural network is important, as it
   raises the question whether architectural changes might be more effective for compositionally
   than regularisation.

   Weaknesses:
   The paper would benefit from more intuition as to why the proposed regularisation term should
   encourage compositionality. This could be either an experiment or simply a visualisation for the
   reader. Only one architecture (LSTM) was tested. It would be interesting to see if transformer
   architectures fare better with compositionality due to the attention mechanism.
   I think the connection between compositional regularisation and operator complexity needs to be
   made more explicit. From reading the introduction both arguments seem a bit disconnected although
   I can infer the authors intentions.

   Conclusion:
   Overall, I would accept this paper to the workshop, since it proposes a simple and interesting




                                                                                                                       12
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



   idea with the authors providing ablations that encourage further analysis of the problem. As a
   suggestion I would encourage the authors to give more intuition on why the proposed
   regularisation term should improve compositionality for the proposed network. I would suggest
   either adding more related work to support the regularisation term or elaborating on the
   intuition behind penalising subsequent steps of the hidden state.

   Rating: 7: Good paper, accept
   Award: No Award
   Confidence: 4: The reviewer is confident but not absolutely certain that the evaluation is
   correct


   Reviewer #2: Compositional Regularization: Unexpected Obstacles in Enhancing Neural Network
   Generalization
   This paper investigates the effectiveness of incorporating a compositional regularization term
   into the loss function of neural networks to improve compositional generalization. The authors
   hypothesized that penalizing deviations from compositional structures would enhance the model’s
   ability to generalize to unseen arithmetic expressions. However, their results on synthetic
   arithmetic datasets showed that compositional regularization did not lead to significant
   improvements and, in some cases, even hindered learning.

   I think this paper greatly contributes to the workshops theme and fits into the scope. Moreover,
   it is a great example of challenges that occur during such approaches and could be interesting to
   discuss in the workshop setting. While I think that the authors should further broaden the
   experiments to other tasks in order to increase the generalizability of the findings, I would
   still recommend to accept the paper.

   Rating: 6: Marginally above acceptance threshold
   Award: No Award
   Confidence: 2: The reviewer is willing to defend the evaluation, but it is quite likely that
   the reviewer did not understand central parts of the paper



5. Limitations & Ethical Considerations
While Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 demonstrates significant progress by successfully generating a
peer-reviewed workshop paper, it is important to contextualize this achievement clearly. First, the
acceptance occurred at a workshop level rather than at the main conference track, and only one of the
three AI-generated submissions was accepted. Workshop papers generally report preliminary results
and exploratory work, and acceptance rates at workshops (typically 60-80%) are notably higher than
at main conference tracks (20-30% for leading machine learning venues such as ICLR, ICML, and
NeurIPS). Thus, the current version of The AI Scientist-v2 does not yet consistently reach the
rigorous standard required for top-tier conference publications, nor does it even reach workshop-level
consistently.
Moreover, despite the structured agentic tree search and enhanced autonomy introduced in Th e
AI Scientist-v2, certain aspects of scientific inquiry—such as formulating genuinely novel, high-
impact hypotheses, designing truly innovative experimental methodologies, or rigorously justifying
design choices with deep domain expertise—remain challenging for purely automated systems.
Addressing these limitations in future iterations will be essential to move beyond preliminary or
incremental scientific results toward consistently high-quality, conference-level contributions.
As LLMs rapidly advance, future versions of our system will likely overcome many current limitations.
Therefore, we believe it is important for the scientific community to study the quality of AI-generated
research, and one of the best ways to do so is to submit (with appropriate permissions) a small
sample of it to the same peer-review processes used to evaluate human work. We conducted this
study with full cooperation from both ICLR leadership and the workshop organizers, and received IRB
approval from the University of British Columbia (H24-02652). Per agreement with ICLR workshop
organizers, our AI-generated papers will not appear on OpenReview’s public forum and have already



                                                                                                                       13
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



been withdrawn. As a community, we need to establish norms for AI-generated science–including
disclosure requirements and timing. We advocate for transparency about AI-generated content,
though questions remain about whether work should first be judged on merit to avoid bias. Going
forward, we will continue to exchange opinions with the research community on the state of this
technology to ensure it does not evolve solely to game peer review or artificially inflate the CVs
of unscrupulous scientists, which would undermine the meaning of the scientific peer review and
evaluation processes.

6. Related Work
Recent advancements have substantially expanded the field of automated scientific discovery, par-
ticularly through approaches leveraging artificial intelligence (AI). Early end-to-end approaches,
exemplified by Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 (Lu et al., 2024), introduced fully automated frameworks,
such as AI-Researcher (Data Intelligence Lab, 2025), capable of autonomously navigating the entire
research pipeline. Subsequent works, however, often incorporate varying degrees of human oversight,
as demonstrated by Intology (Intology AI, 2025) and Carl (AutoScience AI, 2025). Other systems
narrow the scope; for example, CycleResearcher (Weng et al., 2025) focuses specifically on the path
from idea generation to manuscript drafting, explicitly excluding experimental execution. Alternative
approaches include protocol designs for experiments in self-driving laboratories that do not rely
on large language models (LLMs) or use them in complementary roles (Shi et al., 2025). Several
concurrent works explore similar territories, including Agent Laboratory (Schmidgall et al., 2025)
and agentRxiv (Schmidgall and Moor, 2025), highlighting the rapid development in this area.
LLM-based scientific idea generation has been explicitly investigated in recent studies. Notably, Si
et al. (2025) examined the capabilities of LLMs to generate human-level scientific ideas, finding
through human evaluations that LLM-generated ideas were typically more novel but often less feasible
than those proposed by human experts. GraphEval (Feng et al., 2025) offers graph-based methods
for evaluating research ideas, further highlighting the current limitations of LLMs in accurate idea
assessment.
Several benchmarks have been established to systematically evaluate AI performance in scientific tasks.
MLEBench (Chan et al., 2025) and Aide (Jiang et al., 2025) provide structured environments to assess
model capabilities on tasks representative of research engineering workloads. The METR Research
Engineer benchmark (Wijk et al., 2024), for instance, demonstrates AI superiority in executing
short-duration tasks (sub-2-hour tasks). Comprehensive reviews, such as the one by Eger et al. (2025),
document the role and effectiveness of LLMs in scientific workflows. Coding-specific benchmarks such
as SciCode (Tian et al., 2024), curated explicitly by domain scientists, address problems across physics,
chemistry, and biology, encompassing structured sub-problems to rigorously evaluate research-related
programming skills. Similarly, BixBench focuses on computational biology, providing comprehensive
evaluations of LLM-based agents (Mitchener et al., 2025). Additionally, independent evaluations
specifically target AI scientist frameworks, like the evaluation of Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1 by Beel
et al. (2025), further delineate AI capabilities in this domain.
Industry efforts, including Google’s AI Research Copilot (also known as AI Co-Scientist, Gottweis et al.,
2025), exemplify contributions from major technology companies to this growing field. Conceptually,
Bengio et al. (2025) draws a distinction between agentic AI systems and Scientist AIs, emphasizing
that the latter focus primarily on deepening the understanding of data rather than pursuing goal-
directed interactions with the world. This distinction underscores the varying philosophical and
methodological perspectives driving contemporary automated scientific discovery efforts.




                                                                                                                       14
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



7. Conclusion
In this work, we introduced Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2, a significantly improved automated scien-
tific discovery system featuring enhanced autonomy and exploration capabilities. Compared to its
predecessor, Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 1, our system removes reliance on human-crafted templates,
incorporates a structured and exploratory agentic tree search methodology supervised by an exper-
iment manager agent, and integrates Vision-Language Model (VLM) feedback loops for iterative
refinement of visualizations and manuscript quality. We demonstrated that The AI Scientist-v2
is capable of autonomously generating manuscripts that successfully pass peer review at a workshop
of a major machine learning conference.
This achievement, the first instance of a fully AI-generated paper navigating peer review, marks a
notable milestone and shows promising early signs of progress, even considering the limitations
discussed regarding workshop versus conference standards (§5). While significant challenges remain
in consistently achieving top-tier quality and generating truly groundbreaking hypotheses, the capa-
bilities demonstrated here suggest a clear trajectory. We believe that such advancements signal that
next-generation AI Scientists will herald a new era in science. This is just the beginning; we expect AI
capabilities to continue improving, potentially at an exponential rate. At some point in the future, AI
will likely generate papers that match or exceed human quality, even at the highest levels of scientific
publishing.
Ultimately, overcoming current limitations and scaling these systems holds immense potential. We
believe what matters most is not simply how AI science compares to human science, but whether its
discoveries aid in human flourishing, such as curing diseases or expanding our knowledge of the laws
that govern our universe. By developing systems like Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 and sharing them
openly, we look forward to helping usher in this era of AI science contributing to the betterment of
humanity, fostering collaboration and accelerating the pace of discovery.

References
AutoScience AI. Meet Carl: The First AI System to Produce Academically Peer-Reviewed Research,
  2025. URL https://www.autoscience.ai/blog/meet-carl-the-first-ai-system-t
  o-produce-academically-peer-reviewed-research. Accessed: 2025-03-21.
Joeran Beel, Min-Yen Kan, and Moritz Baumgart. An evaluation of sakana’s ai scientist for au-
  tonomous research: Wishful thinking or an emerging reality towards’ artificial general research
  intelligence’(agri)? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.14297, 2025.
Yoshua Bengio, Michael Cohen, Damiano Fornasiere, Joumana Ghosn, Pietro Greiner, Matt MacDer-
  mott, Sören Mindermann, Adam Oberman, Jesse Richardson, Oliver Richardson, Marc-Antoine
  Rondeau, Pierre-Luc St-Charles, and David Williams-King. Superintelligent agents pose catastrophic
  risks: Can scientist ai offer a safer path?, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.15657.
Jun Shern Chan, Neil Chowdhury, Oliver Jaffe, James Aung, Dane Sherburn, Evan Mays, Giulio
  Starace, Kevin Liu, Leon Maksin, Tejal Patwardhan, Aleksander Madry, and Lilian Weng. MLE-
  bench: Evaluating machine learning agents on machine learning engineering. In The Thirteenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/f
  orum?id=6s5uXNWGIh.
Jeff Clune. Ai-gas: Ai-generating algorithms, an alternate paradigm for producing general artificial
  intelligence. CoRR, abs/1905.10985, 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1905.10985.
Cristina Cornelio, Sanjeeb Dash, Vernon Austel, Tyler R. Josephson, Joao Goncalves, Kenneth L.
  Clarkson, Nimrod Megiddo, Bachir El Khadir, and Lior Horesh. Combining data and theory for


                                                                                                                       15
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



  derivable scientific discovery with ai-descartes. Nature Communications, 14(1):1777, Apr 2023.
  ISSN 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-37236-y. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s414
  67-023-37236-y.
The University of Hong Kong Data Intelligence Lab. Ai-researcher: Fully-automated scientific discovery
  with llm agents, 2025. URL https://github.com/HKUDS/AI-Researcher.

Steffen Eger, Yong Cao, Jennifer D’Souza, Andreas Geiger, Christian Greisinger, Stephanie Gross,
  Yufang Hou, Brigitte Krenn, Anne Lauscher, Yizhi Li, et al. Transforming science with large
  language models: A survey on ai-assisted scientific discovery, experimentation, content generation,
  and evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05151, 2025.

Tao Feng, Yihang Sun, and Jiaxuan You. Grapheval: A lightweight graph-based LLM framework for
  idea evaluation. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL
  https://openreview.net/forum?id=5RUM1aIdok.
Paul Gauthier. Aider is ai pair programming in your terminal, 2024. URL https://aider.chat/.
  https://aider.chat/.
Yolanda Gil, Mark Greaves, James Hendler, and Haym Hirsh. Amplify scientific discovery with
  artificial intelligence. Science, 346(6206):171–172, 2014. doi: 10.1126/science.1259439. URL
  https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1259439.
Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar Sirkovic, Artiom
  Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno, et al. Towards an ai co-scientist.
  arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864, 2025.

Intology AI. Zochi Tech Report, 2025. URL https://www.intology.ai/blog/zochi-tech-r
  eport. Accessed: 2025-03-21.
Zhengyao Jiang, Dominik Schmidt, Dhruv Srikanth, Dixing Xu, Ian Kaplan, Deniss Jacenko, and
  Yuxiang Wu. Aide: Ai-driven exploration in the space of code, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/
  abs/2502.13138.
Ross D. King, Jem Rowland, Stephen G. Oliver, Michael Young, Wayne Aubrey, Emma Byrne, Maria
  Liakata, Magdalena Markham, Pinar Pir, Larisa N. Soldatova, Andrew Sparkes, Kenneth E. Whelan,
  and Amanda Clare. The automation of science. Science, 324(5923):85–89, 2009. doi: 10.1126/sc
  ience.1165620. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.1165620.

Hiroaki Kitano. Nobel turing challenge: creating the engine for scientific discovery. npj Systems
  Biology and Applications, 7(1):29, Jun 2021. ISSN 2056-7189. doi: 10.1038/s41540-021-00189-3.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41540-021-00189-3.

Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha. The ai scientist:
  Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292, 2024.

Ludovico Mitchener, Jon M Laurent, Benjamin Tenmann, Siddharth Narayanan, Geemi P Wellawatte,
  Andrew White, Lorenzo Sani, and Samuel G Rodriques. Bixbench: a comprehensive benchmark for
  llm-based agents in computational biology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00096, 2025.

Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. ArXiv,
  abs/1504.04909, 2015. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:14759751.

OpenAI. Openai o1 system card, 2024. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
 272648256.


                                                                                                                      16
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



Samuel Schmidgall and Michael Moor. Agentrxiv: Towards collaborative autonomous research. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2503.18102, 2025.

Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong Yu, Jiang Liu, Zicheng
  Liu, and Emad Barsoum. Agent laboratory: Using llm agents as research assistants. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2501.04227, 2025.

Yu-Zhe Shi, Mingchen Liu, Fanxu Meng, Qiao Xu, Zhangqian Bi, Kun He, Lecheng Ruan, and Qining
  Wang. Hierarchically encapsulated representation for protocol design in self-driving labs. In The
  Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openrevi
  ew.net/forum?id=9nUBh4V6SA.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
  Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 36, 2024.

Chenglei Si, Diyi Yang, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. Can LLMs generate novel research ideas? a
  large-scale human study with 100+ NLP researchers. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=M23dTGWCZy.

Minyang Tian, Luyu Gao, Shizhuo Dylan Zhang, Xinan Chen, Cunwei Fan, Xuefei Guo, Roland Haas,
 Pan Ji, Kittithat Krongchon, Yao Li, Shengyan Liu, Di Luo, Yutao Ma, Hao Tong, Kha Trinh, Chenyu
 Tian, Zihan Wang, Bohao Wu, Yanyu Xiong, Shengzhu Yin, Minhui Zhu, Kilian Lieret, Yanxin Lu,
 Genglin Liu, Yufeng Du, Tianhua Tao, Ofir Press, Jamie Callan, Eliu Huerta, and Hao Peng. Scicode:
 A research coding benchmark curated by scientists, 2024.

Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu, Payal Chandak,
 Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, Anima Anandkumar, Karianne Bergen, Carla P.
 Gomes, Shirley Ho, Pushmeet Kohli, Joan Lasenby, Jure Leskovec, Tie-Yan Liu, Arjun Manrai,
 Debora Marks, Bharath Ramsundar, Le Song, Jimeng Sun, Jian Tang, Petar Veličković, Max Welling,
 Linfeng Zhang, Connor W. Coley, Yoshua Bengio, and Marinka Zitnik. Scientific discovery in
 the age of artificial intelligence. Nature, 620(7972):47–60, Aug 2023. ISSN 1476-4687. doi:
 10.1038/s41586-023-06221-2. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06221-2.

Xingyao Wang, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Yizhe Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Executable
  code actions elicit better llm agents. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
  Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024.

Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Guangsheng Bao, Hongbo Zhang, Jindong Wang, Yue Zhang, and Linyi
  Yang. Cycleresearcher: Improving automated research via automated review. In The Thirteenth
  International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/f
  orum?id=bjcsVLoHYs.
Hjalmar Wijk, Tao R. Lin, Joel Becker, Sami Jawhar, Neev Parikh, Thomas Broadley, Lawrence
  Chan, Michael Chen, Josh Clymer, Jai Dhyani, Elena Ericheva, Katharyn Garcia, Brian Goodrich,
  Nikola Jurkovic, Megan Kinniment, Aron Lajko, Seraphina Nix, Lucas Jun Koba Sato, William
  Saunders, Maksym Taran, Ben West, and Elizabeth Barnes. Re-bench: Evaluating frontier ai r&d
  capabilities of language model agents against human experts. ArXiv, abs/2411.15114, 2024. URL
  https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:274192262.
Yongjun Xu, Xin Liu, Xin Cao, Changping Huang, Enke Liu, Sen Qian, Xingchen Liu, Yanjun Wu,
  Fengliang Dong, Cheng-Wei Qiu, Junjun Qiu, Keqin Hua, Wentao Su, Jian Wu, Huiyu Xu, Yong
  Han, Chenguang Fu, Zhigang Yin, Miao Liu, Ronald Roepman, Sabine Dietmann, Marko Virta,


                                                                                                                       17
           Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



Fredrick Kengara, Ze Zhang, Lifu Zhang, Taolan Zhao, Ji Dai, Jialiang Yang, Liang Lan, Ming Luo,
Zhaofeng Liu, Tao An, Bin Zhang, Xiao He, Shan Cong, Xiaohong Liu, Wei Zhang, James P. Lewis,
James M. Tiedje, Qi Wang, Zhulin An, Fei Wang, Libo Zhang, Tao Huang, Chuan Lu, Zhipeng Cai,
Fang Wang, and Jiabao Zhang. Artificial intelligence: A powerful paradigm for scientific research.
The Innovation, 2(4), Nov 2021. ISSN 2666-6758. doi: 10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100179. URL
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xinn.2021.100179.




                                                                                                                    18
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



Author Contributions
Yutaro Yamada (shared first author): Co-led the project and contributed core ideas. Coded the core
tree-search and template-free version of the AI Scientist v2. Ran paper generation experiments. Read
and validated the work of many AI-generated papers to select submissions and checked the paper
code implementations. Led the writing of the paper. Wrote detailed analyses of the submitted papers
for our manuscript.
Robert Tjarko Lange (shared first author): Co-initiated, co-led the project and contributed core
ideas. Coded core parts of VLM AI Reviewer, tailored the paper generation pipeline to the workshop
and ran the paper generation experiments. Organized the workshop communication process. Read
and validated the work of many AI-generated papers to select submissions and checked the paper
code implementations. Led the writing of the paper. Wrote detailed analyses of the submitted papers
for our manuscript.
Cong Lu (shared first author): Co-initiated, co-led the project and contributed core ideas. Coded
core parts of the improved idea generation, tool use, experiment aggregation, and paper writing
framework. Evaluated AI-generated paper submissions. Wrote and led the IRB approval process. Led
the writing of the paper.
Shengran Hu: Enhanced the iterative AI reviewer with VLM feedback, contributed to the experiment
and paper writing framework, helped run paper generation experiments, read and validated the work
of many AI-generated papers to select submissions, and checked the paper code implementations.
Helped writing and iterating over drafts of the paper. Helped write the IRB approval.
Chris Lu: Co-initiated the project. Provided advice, feedback, and writing.
Jakob Foerster: Provided advice, feedback, and writing.
Jeff Clune (equal advising): Provided overarching guidance for the research project, offering technical
insight, advice, feedback, and writing. Oversaw the IRB application process. Evaluated AI-generated
paper submissions.
David Ha (equal advising): Provided overarching guidance for the research project, offering technical
insight, advice, feedback, and writing. Oversaw the public communication process.




                                                                                                                       19
            Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



Supplementary Material

Table of Contents
A Hyperparameters                                                                                                    21

B Prompts                                                                                                            21

C AI Generated Papers                                                                                                31
  C.1 Compositional Regularization: Unexpected Obstacles in Enhancing Neural Network
      Generalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   32
       C.1.1 AI Scientist Team Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      41
       C.1.2 AI Scientist Team Code Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       42
  C.2 Unveiling the Impact of Label Noise on Model Calibration in Deep Learning . . . . . .                          45
       C.2.1 Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              45
       C.2.2 AI Scientist Team Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      53
       C.2.3 AI Scientist Team Code Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       55
       C.2.4 Workshop Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      57
  C.3 Real-world Challenges in Pest Detection using Deep Learning: an Investigation into
      Failures and Solutions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   58
       C.3.1 Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 Idea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              58
       C.3.2 AI Scientist Team Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      65
       C.3.3 AI Scientist Team Code Review . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                       66
       C.3.4 Workshop Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      67




                                                                                                                     20
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



A. Hyperparameters
This section details the key hyperparameters used in The AI Scientist-v2. Model configurations
for language and vision-language models are listed in Table 2. The hyperparameters governing the
agentic tree search (§3.2.2) and experiment stage (§3.2.1) progression, including node execution
limits, are shown in Table 3.

Table 2 | LLM and VLM Hyperparameters.

    Component/Task                                   Model Used                           Max Tokens          Temperature
    Code Generation (§3.2)                           Claude 3.5 Sonnet (v2)                   8,192                    0.5
    LLM/VLM Feedback Agents (§3.4)                   GPT-4o                                   8,192                    0.5
    Summary Report Agent (§3)                        GPT-4o                                   8,192                    1.0

Table 3 | Agentic Tree Search & Execution Hyperparameters (§3.2.2, §3.2.1).

                           Hyperparameter                                                   Value
                           Debug Probability                                                 1.0
                           Maximum Debug Depth                                                3
                           Maximum Experiment Runtime per Node                             1 hour
                            Node Allocation per Stage:
                           Stage 1: Preliminary Investigation                            21 nodes
                           Stage 2: Hyperparameter Tuning                                12 nodes
                           Stage 3: Research Agenda Execution                            12 nodes
                           Stage 4: Ablation Studies                                     12 nodes

The total time required for Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 to generate a single paper depends on the
complexity of the problems. Based on our experience, this process usually takes anywhere from
several hours to a maximum of 15 hours, which is the runtime limit we have set.

B. Prompts
In this section, we include the prompts used in all phases of Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2.

   Idea Generation Prompt
   # System prompt
   You are an experienced AI researcher who aims to propose high-impact
   research ideas resembling exciting grant proposals. Feel free to propose
   any novel ideas or experiments; make sure they are novel. Be very creative
   and think out of the box. Each proposal should stem from a simple and
   elegant question, observation, or hypothesis about the topic. For example,
   they could involve very interesting and simple interventions or
   investigations that explore new possibilities or challenge existing
   assumptions. Clearly clarify how the proposal distinguishes from
   the existing literature.

   Ensure that the proposal can be done starting from the provided
   codebase, and does not require resources beyond what an academic
   lab could afford. These proposals should lead to papers that are
   publishable at top ML conferences.



                                                                                                                             21
        Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




You have access to the following tools:

{tool_descriptions}

Respond in the following format:

ACTION:
<The action to take, exactly one of {tool_names_str}>

ARGUMENTS:
<If ACTION is "SearchSemanticScholar", provide the search query
as {{"query": "your search query"}}. If ACTION is "FinalizeIdea",
provide the idea details as {{"idea": {{ ... }}}} with the IDEA JSON
specified below.>

If you choose to finalize your idea, provide the IDEA JSON in the arguments:

IDEA JSON:
```json
{{
    "Name": "...",
    "Title": "...",
    "Short Hypothesis": "...",
    "Related Work": "...",
    "Abstract": "...",
    "Experiments": "...",
    "Risk Factors and Limitations": "..."
}}
```

Ensure the JSON is properly formatted for automatic parsing.

Note: You should perform at least one literature search before finalizing
your idea to ensure it is well-informed by existing research.

# Initial idea generation prompt
{workshop_description}

Here are the proposals that you have already generated:

{prev_ideas_string}

Begin by generating an interestingly new high-level research proposal
that differs from what you have previously proposed.
...

# reflection prompt
Round {current_round}/{num_reflections}.

In your thoughts, first carefully consider the quality, novelty,
and feasibility of the proposal you just created.
Include any other factors that you think are important in evaluating
the proposal.
Ensure the proposal is clear and concise, and the JSON is in



                                                                                                                 22
         Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



the correct format.
Do not make things overly complicated.
In the next attempt, try to refine and improve your proposal.
Stick to the spirit of the original idea unless there are glaring issues.

If you have new information from tools, such as literature search results,
incorporate them into your reflection and refine your proposal accordingly.

Results from your last action (if any):

{last_tool_results}
...

Experiment Prompt
Introduction:
You are an AI researcher who is looking to publish a paper that will
contribute significantly to the field."
Your first task is to write a python code to implement a solid baseline
based on your research idea provided below,
from data preparation to model training, as well as evaluation and
visualization.
Focus on getting a simple but working implementation first, before any
sophisticated improvements.
We will explore more advanced variations in later stages.

Plot Aggregation Prompt
# System prompt
You are an ambitious AI researcher who is preparing final plots for
a scientific paper submission.
You have multiple experiment summaries (baseline, research, ablation),
each possibly containing references to different plots or numerical insights.
There is also a top-level 'research_idea.md' file that outlines
the overarching research direction.
Your job is to produce ONE Python script that fully aggregates
and visualizes the final results for a comprehensive research paper.

Key points:
1) Combine or replicate relevant existing plotting code, referencing
how data was originally generated (from code references) to ensure correctness.
2) Create a complete set of final scientific plots, stored in 'figures/' only
(since only those are used in the final paper).
3) Make sure to use existing .npy data for analysis; do NOT hallucinate data.
If single numeric results are needed, these may be copied
from the JSON summaries.
4) Only create plots where the data is best presented
as a figure and not as a table.
E.g. don't use bar plots if the data is hard to visually compare.
5) The final aggregator script must be in triple backticks and stand alone
so it can be dropped into a codebase and run.
6) If there are plots based on synthetic data, include them in the appendix.

Implement best practices:



                                                                                                                  23
        Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



- Do not produce extraneous or irrelevant plots.
- Maintain clarity, minimal but sufficient code.
- Demonstrate thoroughness for a final research paper submission.
- Do NOT reference non-existent files or images.
- Use the .npy files to get data for the plots and key numbers
from the JSON summaries.
- Demarcate each individual plot, and put them in separate try-catch blocks
so that the failure of one plot does not affect the others.
- Make sure to only create plots that are unique and
needed for the final paper
and appendix. A good number could be around {MAX_FIGURES} plots in total.
- Aim to aggregate multiple figures into one plot if suitable,
i.e. if they are all related to the same topic. You can place up to 3 plots
in one row.
- Provide well-labeled plots (axes, legends, titles) that highlight main
findings. Use informative names everywhere, including in the legend for
referencing them in the final paper. Make sure the legend is always visible.
- Make the plots look professional (if applicable, no top and right spines,
dpi of 300, adequate ylim, etc.).
- Do not use labels with underscores, e.g. "loss_vs_epoch" should be
"loss vs epoch".
- For image examples, select a few categories/classes
to showcase the diversity of results instead of showing a single
category/class. Some can be included in the main paper, while the rest
can go in the appendix.

Your output should be the entire Python aggregator script in triple backticks.

# Plot aggregator prompt
We have three JSON summaries of scientific experiments:
baseline, research, ablation.
They may contain lists of figure descriptions, code to generate
the figures, and paths to the .npy files containing the numerical results.
Our goal is to produce final, publishable figures.

--- RESEARCH IDEA ---
```
{idea_text}
```

IMPORTANT:
- The aggregator script must load existing .npy experiment data from
the "exp_results_npy_files" fields (ONLY using full and exact file paths
in the summary JSONs) for thorough plotting.
- It should call os.makedirs("figures", exist_ok=True) before saving any plots.
- Aim for a balance of empirical results, ablations, and diverse,
informative visuals in 'figures/' that comprehensively showcase
the finalized research outcomes.
- If you need .npy paths from the summary, only copy those paths directly
(rather than copying and parsing the entire summary).

Your generated Python script must:
1) Load or refer to relevant data and .npy files from these summaries.
Use the full and exact file paths in the summary JSONs.




                                                                                                                 24
         Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




2) Synthesize or directly create final, scientifically meaningful plots
for a final research paper (comprehensive and complete), referencing
the original code if needed to see how the data was generated.
3) Carefully combine or replicate relevant existing plotting code to produce
these final aggregated plots in 'figures/' only, since only those are
used in the final paper.
4) Do not hallucinate data. Data must either be loaded from .npy files
or copied from the JSON summaries.
5) The aggregator script must be fully self-contained, and place the
final plots in 'figures/'.
6) This aggregator script should produce a comprehensive and final set of
scientific plots for the final paper, reflecting all major findings from
the experiment data.
7) Make sure that every plot is unique and not duplicated from the
original plots. Delete any duplicate plots if necessary.
8) Each figure can have up to 3 subplots using fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 3).
9) Use a font size larger than the default for plot labels and titles
to ensure they are readable in the final PDF paper.


Below are the summaries in JSON:

{combined_summaries_str}

Respond with a Python script in triple backticks.
...

Writeup Prompt (ICBINB workshop specific)
# System prompt
You are an ambitious AI researcher who is looking to publish a paper to
the "I Can't Believe It's Not Better" (ICBINB) Workshop at ICLR 2025.
This workshop aims to highlight real-world pitfalls, challenges, and negative
or inconclusive results in deep learning, encouraging open discussion.
You must accurately represent the results of the experiments.
The main paper is limited to {page_limit} pages in single-column format, not
counting references. In general, try to use the available space and include
all relevant information.
DO NOT USE MORE THAN {page_limit} PAGES FOR THE MAIN TEXT.
MINIMIZE THE USAGE OF ITEMIZE OR ENUMERATE.
ONLY USE THEM IF THEY ARE ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY
AND CONTAIN SUBSTANTIAL INFORMATION.
Ensure that the tables and figures are correctly placed
in a reasonable location and format.

- Do not change the overall style which is mandated by the conference. Keep to
the current method of including the references.bib file.
- Do not remove the \\graphicspath directive or no figures will be found.
- Do not add `Acknowledgements` section to the paper.

Here are some tips for each section of the paper:

- **Title**:
  - Title should be catchy and informative. It should give a good idea of what



                                                                                                                  25
        Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



  the paper is about.
  - Try to keep it under 2 lines.

- **Abstract**:
  - Brief summary highlighting the nature of the challenge or pitfall explored.
  - Concise motivation of why this matters for real-world deployment.
  - This should be one continuous paragraph.

- **Introduction**:
  - Overview of the issue or challenge being explored.
  - Clearly state why this problem is important, especially for practical
  or real-world contexts.
  - Summarize your contributions or findings:
  they may include negative results, real-world pitfalls, unexpected
  behaviors, or partial improvements.

- **Related Work**:
  - Cite relevant papers or approaches that have tackled similar issues or
  have encountered similar pitfalls.
  - Compare and contrast with your own findings.

- **Background** (optional):
  - Provide necessary technical or domain-specific background if needed.

- **Method / Problem Discussion**:
  - Detail the problem context or the method if it is relevant to
  highlight the challenges faced.
  - If results are not strictly an improvement, discuss partial
  successes or lessons learned.

- **Experiments** (if applicable):
  - Present results truthfully according to the data you have.
  Negative, unexpected, or inconclusive findings are valid
  contributions for this workshop.
  - Include figures, tables, or real-world examples
  that illustrate the pitfalls.
  - Include up to 4 figures in the main text.
  All other figures should be in the appendix.

- **Conclusion**:
  - Summarize the main lessons learned or contributions.
  - Suggest next steps or future directions, highlighting how these insights
  can help the community avoid or overcome similar issues.

- **Appendix**:
  - Place for supplementary material that did not fit in the main paper.
  - Add more information and details (hyperparameters, algorithms, etc.)
  in the supplementary material.
  - Add more plots and tables in the supplementary material. Make sure
  that this information is not already covered in the main paper.
  - When checking for duplicate figures, be sure to also review
  their descriptions to catch cases where different figures
  convey the same information.
  For example, one figure might present aggregated training




                                                                                                                 26
        Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



  accuracy as a single line
  plot with a shaded standard deviation (e.g.,
  aggregated_training_accuracy.png), while another
  (per_seed_training_accuracy.png) shows the same data as
  three separate line plots.

Ensure you are always writing good compilable LaTeX code.
Common mistakes that should be fixed include:
- LaTeX syntax errors (unenclosed math, unmatched braces, etc.).
- Duplicate figure labels or references.
- Unescaped special characters: & %
- Proper table/figure closure.
- Do not hallucinate new citations or any results not in the logs.

Ensure proper citation usage:
- Always include references within \begin{{filecontents}}
{{references.bib}} ... \end{{filecontents}}, even if they haven't
changed from the previous round.
- Use citations from the provided references.bib content.
- Each section (especially Related Work) should have multiple citations.

When returning final code, place it in fenced triple backticks with
'latex' syntax highlighting.
...

# Writeup prompt

Your goal is to write up the following idea:

```markdown
{idea_text}
```

We have the following experiment summaries (JSON):
```json
{summaries}
```

We also have a script used to produce the final plots (use this to see
how the plots are generated and what names are used in the legend):
```python
{aggregator_code}
```
Please also consider which plots can naturally be grouped
together as subfigures.

Available plots for the writeup (use these filenames):
```
{plot_list}
```

We also have VLM-based figure descriptions:
```
{plot_descriptions}




                                                                                                                 27
         Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



```

Your current progress on the LaTeX write-up is:
```latex
{latex_writeup}
```

Produce the final version of the LaTeX manuscript now, ensuring the
paper is coherent, concise, and reports results accurately.
Return the entire file in full, with no unfilled placeholders!
This must be an acceptable complete LaTeX writeup, suitable for a 4-page
single-column workshop paper.
Make sure to use the citations from the references.bib file.

Please provide the updated LaTeX code for 'template.tex', wrapped in
triple backticks with "latex" syntax highlighting, like so:

```latex
<UPDATED LATEX CODE>
```



Writeup Reflection Prompt

Now let's reflect and identify any issues (including but not limited to):
1) Are there any LaTeX syntax errors or style violations we can fix?
Refer to the chktex output below.
2) Is the writing clear, and scientifically rigorous for a workshop
focusing on real-world pitfalls?
3) Have we included all relevant details from the summaries without
hallucinating?
4) Are there short sections (one or two sentences) that could be
combined into a single paragraph?
5) Can we use more information and details (hyperparameters, unused
figures, etc.) in the supplementary material? Only add information that
is not already covered in the main paper.
6) The following figures are available in the folder but not used in the
LaTeX: {sorted(unused_figs)}
7) The following figure references in the LaTeX do not match any actual
file: {sorted(invalid_figs)}
{reflection_page_info}
chktex results:
```
{check_output}
```
8) Issues identified in the VLM reviews of the images, their captions,
and related text discussions. Ensure each caption clearly matches its
image content and that there is substantial discussion of each figure in
the text.
VLM reviews:
```
{review_img_cap_ref}
```



                                                                                                                  28
         Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




9) Duplicate figures between main text and appendix.
Make sure to remove the duplicate figures from the appendix.
```
{analysis_duplicate_figs}
```

Please provide a revised complete LaTeX in triple backticks, or repeat
the same if no changes are needed.
Return the entire file in full, with no unfilled placeholders!
This must be an acceptable complete LaTeX writeup.
Do not hallucinate any details!
Ensure proper citation usage:
- Always include references within \begin{{filecontents}}
{{references.bib}} ... \end{{filecontents}}, even if they haven't
changed from the previous round.
- Use citations from the provided references.bib content.
...

VLM Reflection Prompt

Now let's reflect on
The following figures are currently used in the paper:
{sorted(used_figs)}
The following figures are available in the folder but not used in the
LaTeX: {sorted(unused_figs)}

{reflection_page_info}

The following is the VLM review on figures:

{review_img_selection}

Please review the figures and make the following changes:
1. For figures that do not add significant value to the paper,
move them to the appendix
2. For figures that are not very informative or do not effectively
communicate meaningful patterns, remove them entirely
3. For figures that do not contain subfigures and present sparse
information, consider combining them with other related figures
4. Update all relevant text discussions to reflect any changes in figure
placement or combinations
5. Enhance the scientific analysis of the remaining figures in the text
- provide detailed, insightful discussions of their significance and findings

Please ensure all changes maintain scientific rigor and improve the
paper's clarity and impact.
Be more aggressive with figure selection - move more figures to the
appendix or group them together with other figures if the page limit is
already exceeded.

If you believe you are done with reflection, simply say: "I am done".
...




                                                                                                                  29
        Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



VLM Image Review Prompt
The abstract of the paper is:

{abstract}

You will be given an image via the vision API. As a careful scientist
reviewer, your task is to:
  1. Examine the provided image closely.
  2. Describe in detail what the image shows in a scientific manner.
  3. Critically analyze whether the image content aligns with the given
  caption:

{caption}

  4. We also have references in the main text that mention the figure:

{main_text_figrefs}

You should:
  - Examine the figure in detail: conclude elements in figures (e.g., name
  of axis) and describe what information is shown (e.g,. the line of
  loss decrease monotonically but plateau after X epoch)
  - Suggest any potential improvements or issues in the figure itself
  (e.g., missing legend, unclear labeling, no meaningful conclusion,
  mismatch with what the caption claims).
  - Critique the caption: does it accurately describe the figure? Is it
  too long/short? Does it include a concise takeaway?
  - Review how well the main text references (figrefs) explain the figure:
  Are they missing? Do they adequately describe the figure's content, context,
  or purpose?

Finally, respond in the following format:

THOUGHT:
<THOUGHT>

REVIEW JSON:
```json
<JSON>
```
In <JSON>, provide the review in JSON format with the following fields
in the order:
- "Img_description": "<Describe the figure's contents here>"
- "Img_review": "<Your analysis of the figure itself, including any
suggestions for improvement>"
- "Caption_review": "<Your assessment of how well the caption matches
the figure and any suggestions>"
- "Figrefs_review": "<Your thoughts on whether the main text references
adequately describe or integrate the figure>"

In <THOUGHT>, first, thoroughly reason through your observations,
analysis of alignment, and any suggested improvements. It is okay to be
very long.
Then, provide your final structured output in <JSON>.



                                                                                                                 30
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



   Make sure the JSON is valid and properly formatted, as it will be
   parsed automatically.


C. AI Generated Papers
To illustrate the capabilities and current limitations of The AI Scientist-v2, this section presents
the three full manuscripts generated entirely by the system and submitted to the ICLR 2025 ICBINB
workshop. A summary of these submissions is provided in Table 4. Following the table, each manuscript
is included in full, accompanied by comprehensive annotations detailing our internal evaluation,
including scientific assessment and code review.

Table 4 | Overview of AI-Generated Workshop Submissions.

Title                                                                   Workshop Result                         Materials
                                                                                                          See Appendix C.1,
Compositional Regularization: Unexpected Obsta- Accepted (Score: 6.33)
                                                                                                          GitHub Repository
cles in Enhancing Neural Network Generalization

                                                                                                         See Appendix C.2.1,
Unveiling the Impact of Label Noise on Model Cali-                             Rejected
                                                                                                          GitHub Repository
bration in Deep Learning

                                                                                                         See Appendix C.3.1,
Real-world Challenges in Pest Detection using Deep                             Rejected
                                                                                                          GitHub Repository
Learning: an Investigation into Failures and Solu-
tions




                                                                                                                            31
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.1. Compositional Regularization: Unexpected Obstacles in Enhancing Neural Network Gener-
     alization
  Initial Idea
  "Name": "compositional_regularization_nn",
  "Title": "Enhancing Compositional Generalization in Neural Networks via Compositional
  Regularization",
  "Short Hypothesis": "Introducing a compositional regularization term during training can
  encourage neural networks to develop compositional representations, thereby improving their
  ability to generalize to novel combinations of known components.",
  "Related Work": "Previous work has highlighted the challenges neural networks face in achieving
  compositional generalization. Studies such as 'Compositional Generalization through Abstract
  Representations in Human and Artificial Neural Networks' (Ito et al., NeurIPS 2022) have
  explored abstract representations to tackle this issue. However, limited research focuses on
  directly incorporating explicit regularization terms into the training objective to enforce
  compositional structures. Our proposal distinguishes itself by introducing a novel
  regularization approach that penalizes deviations from predefined compositional patterns during
  training, encouraging the network to internalize compositional rules.",
  "Abstract": "Neural networks excel in many tasks but often struggle with compositional
  generalization\u2014the ability to understand and generate novel combinations of familiar
  components. This limitation hampers their performance on tasks requiring systematic
  generalization beyond the training data. In this proposal, we introduce a novel training method
  that incorporates an explicit compositional regularization term into the loss function of
  neural networks. This regularization term is designed to encourage the formation of
  compositional representations by penalizing the network when its internal representations
  deviate from expected compositional structures. We hypothesize that this approach will enhance
  the network's ability to generalize to unseen combinations, mimicking human-like compositional
  reasoning. We will test our method on synthetic benchmarks like the SCAN and COGS datasets,
  which are specifically designed to evaluate compositional generalization, as well as on real-
  world tasks such as machine translation and semantic parsing. By comparing our method to
  baseline models and existing approaches, we aim to demonstrate significant improvements in
  generalization performance. This work offers a new avenue for enforcing compositionality in
  neural networks through regularization, potentially bridging the gap between neural network
  capabilities and human cognitive flexibility.",
  "Experiments": [
      "Implement the compositional regularization term and integrate it into the loss function of
      standard sequence-to-sequence neural network architectures with attention mechanisms.",
      "Train models on synthetic datasets like SCAN and COGS, evaluating performance on
      compositional generalization tasks with and without the regularization term.",
      "Apply the method to real-world tasks such as machine translation using the IWSLT dataset
      and semantic parsing with the GeoQuery dataset, assessing improvements in generalization to
      new language constructs.",
      "Analyze the learned representations by visualizing embedding spaces and utilizing
      compositionality metrics to assess how the regularization affects internal
      representations.",
      "Conduct ablation studies to determine the impact of different strengths of the
      regularization term, identifying the optimal balance between enforcing compositionality and
      maintaining overall performance.",
      "Compare the proposed method against other approaches aimed at improving compositional
      generalization, such as meta-learning techniques and specialized architectures."
  ],
  "Risk Factors and Limitations": [
      "The effectiveness of the compositional regularization may vary across different datasets
      and tasks, potentially limiting its generalizability.",
      "An improperly balanced regularization term could negatively impact model performance on
      the primary task, leading to lower accuracy.",
      "Additional computational overhead from calculating the regularization term may increase
      training time and resource requirements.",
      "Defining appropriate compositional structures for complex or less-understood domains may
      be challenging, affecting the applicability of the method.",
      "The approach may face scalability issues when applied to very large models or datasets
      common in industrial applications."
  ]


Link to more material: https://github.com/SakanaAI/AI-Scientist-ICLR2025-Works
hop-Experiment/tree/master/compositional-regularization.



                                                                                                                      32
                 AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                 C OMPOSITIONAL R EGULARIZATION :
                 U NEXPECTED O BSTACLES IN E NHANCING N EURAL
                 N ETWORK G ENERALIZATION




                       2 ED
                  AI Scientist-v2
                  Paper under double-blind review




                    -V AT
                                                            A BSTRACT

                          Neural networks excel in many tasks but often struggle with compositional gener-




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                          alization—the ability to understand and generate novel combinations of familiar
                          components. This limitation hampers their performance on tasks requiring sys-




             EN E A
                          tematic reasoning beyond the training data. In this work, we introduce a training


           CI G W!!
                          method that incorporates an explicit compositional regularization term into the
                          loss function, aiming to encourage the network to develop compositional repre-
         IS L E N
                          sentations. Contrary to our expectations, our experiments on synthetic arithmetic
                          expression datasets reveal that models trained with compositional regularization
        A S P IO
                          do not achieve significant improvements in generalization to unseen combinations
                R
                          compared to baseline models. Additionally, we find that increasing the complex-
                          ity of expressions exacerbates the models’ difficulties, regardless of compositional
                          regularization. These findings highlight the challenges of enforcing compositional
      E OUPA T


                          structures in neural networks and suggest that such regularization may not be suf-
                          ficient to enhance compositional generalization.
              Y
             U
    TH M IS A




                 1   I NTRODUCTION
           C




                 Compositional generalization refers to the ability to understand and produce novel combinations of
                 known components, a fundamental aspect of human cognition (Ito et al., 2022). Despite the success
                 of neural networks in various domains, they often struggle with compositional generalization, lim-
                 iting their applicability in tasks requiring systematic reasoning beyond the training data (Qu et al.,
        H




                 2023; Klinger et al., 2020). Previous efforts to enhance compositional generalization have explored
                 various approaches, including architectural modifications and training strategies (Finn et al., 2017;
 BY N T




                 Lepori et al., 2023). One promising direction is the incorporation of regularization terms that en-      Comment:
                 courage certain properties in the learned representations (Yin et al., 2023).                            Citing MAML
      O




                                                                                                                          in the context
                 In this paper, we introduce a training method that incorporates an explicit compositional regular-
                                                                                                                          of composi-
                 ization term into the loss function. This regularization term is designed to penalize deviations from
                                                                                                                          tional gener-
                 expected compositional structures in the network’s internal representations, with the aim of encour-
                                                                                                                          alization does
                 aging the network to form compositional representations. We hypothesized that this approach would
                                                                                                                          not seem en-
   TO




                 enhance the network’s ability to generalize to unseen combinations. However, our experiments on
                                                                                                                          tirely appropri-
                 synthetic arithmetic expression datasets show that the inclusion of compositional regularization does
                                                                                                                          ate
                 not lead to the expected improvements in generalization performance. In some cases, it even hinders
                 the learning process. Furthermore, we observe that increasing the complexity of arithmetic expres-
Comment:         sions, such as using more operators or nesting, exacerbates the models’ generalization difficulties
AU




The dataset      regardless of the regularization. These unexpected results highlight the challenges of enforcing
used in the      compositionality through regularization and suggest that this approach may not be straightforwardly
experiments      effective.
did not con-
tain a nesting   In summary, we propose a compositional regularization term intended to enhance compositional
structure, but   generalization in neural networks, conduct extensive experiments to evaluate its impact, and analyze
some exper-      the unexpected outcomes, including the impact of operator complexity, discussing potential reasons
iments were
conducted        why compositional regularization did not yield the anticipated benefits.
with increas-
ing complexity
by incorpo-                                                        1
rating more
operators.
                 AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                 2     R ELATED W ORK
Comment: An
incomplete and
too general      Compositional generalization in neural networks has been a topic of considerable research interest
version of a     (Klinger et al., 2020). Ito et al. (2022) explored abstract representations to tackle this issue, empha-
related work     sizing the importance of compositionality in achieving human-like reasoning. Yin et al. (2023) pro-
section.         posed consistency regularization training to enhance compositional generalization. Meta-learning




                       2 ED
                 approaches, such as Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning (MAML) (Finn et al., 2017), have also been
                 investigated to improve generalization capabilities. Lepori et al. (2023) studied structural composi-
                 tionality in neural networks, suggesting that networks may implicitly learn to decompose complex
                 tasks.
                 Our work differs by directly incorporating an explicit regularization term into the training objective




                    -V AT
                 to enforce compositional structures. Despite the theoretical appeal, our findings indicate that such
                 regularization may not effectively enhance compositional generalization and that operator complex-
                 ity plays a significant role in the models’ performance limitations.




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                 3     M ETHOD




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                 Our goal is to enhance compositional generalization in neural networks by incorporating a composi-
                 tional regularization term into the training loss. We focus on a simple yet illustrative task: evaluating
         IS L E N
                 arithmetic expressions involving basic operators.
        A S P IO
                 3.1   M ODEL A RCHITECTURE
                R
Comment:         We use an LSTM-based neural network (Goodfellow et al., 2016) to model the mapping from input
                 expressions to their computed results. The model consists of an embedding layer, an LSTM layer,
      E OUPA T

This should be
Hochreiter &     and a fully connected output layer.
Schmidhuber
              Y
             U


(1997).
                 3.2   C OMPOSITIONAL R EGULARIZATION
    TH M IS A



                 Let ht be the hidden state at time t. We define the compositional regularization term as the mean           Comment:
                 squared difference between successive hidden states:                                                        This should be
           C




                                                                   T −1
                                                                                                                             more precise.
                                                               1 X                                                           E.g. refer to
                                                   Lcomp =              ∥ht+1 − ht ∥2                                 (1)
                                                             T − 1 t=1                                                       the embed-
                                                                                                                             ding hidden
                 where T is the length of the input sequence.                                                                state. A bet-
        H




                                                                                                                             ter alternative
                 This term penalizes large changes in hidden states between successive time steps, encouraging the
                                                                                                                             would be et
                 model to form additive representations, which are a simple form of compositionality.
                                                                                                                             and et−1 .
 BY N T




                 3.3   T RAINING O BJECTIVE
      O




                 The total loss is the sum of the main loss (mean squared error between predicted and true results)
                 and the compositional regularization term weighted by a hyperparameter λ:
                                                        Ltotal = Lmain + λLcomp .                                     (2)
   TO




                 We experimented with different values of λ to assess its impact on compositional generalization.

                 4     E XPERIMENTS
AU




                 4.1   E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP

                 We generated synthetic datasets of arithmetic expressions to evaluate compositional generalization.
                 The datasets consist of expressions combining digits and operators (e.g., “3+4”, “7*2”). We com-
                 pared models trained with and without the compositional regularization term and performed several
                 ablation studies to assess the impact of different hyperparameters, operator complexity, and archi-
                 tectural choices.


                                                                    2
                   AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                   Figure 1: Baseline model performance over epochs. Left: Training and test loss decrease over
                   epochs, indicating learning progress. Middle: Test accuracy increases, reaching approximately
                   84%. Right: Compositional loss remains steady, suggesting the model does not inherently develop




                    -V AT
Comment:
Figure 1 shows     compositional representations without regularization.
only up to
40% accuracy,
but since Fig-     4.1.1    DATASETS




                  ST R
                TI NE S
ure 2 (Right),
which uses a               • Training set: 1,000 randomly generated expressions using a limited set of numbers and




             EN E A
similar setup,               operators.



           CI G W!!
shows around
84%, it’s likely           • Test set: 200 expressions not seen during training, including novel combinations of num-
                             bers and operators, as well as increased operator complexity.
         IS L E N
that the x-axis
of Figure 1 is
truncated.         4.1.2    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS
        A S P IO
                R
                           • Models were trained for 30 epochs using the Adam optimizer and mean squared error loss.
                           • The compositional regularization term was weighted by λ = 0.1 unless otherwise specified.
      E OUPA T


                           • We evaluated model performance using test accuracy (percentage of correct predictions
Comment:                     within a tolerance) and compositional loss.
              Y
             U


“Within a tol-             • Experiments were repeated with different hyperparameters and operator complexities.
erance” refers
to the fact that
    TH M IS A



the model re-      4.2     R ESULTS
gresses its out-
put to match       4.2.1    BASELINE P ERFORMANCE
           C




the ground
truth numerical    We first trained the baseline LSTM model without compositional regularization. Figure 1 shows the          Comment:
answer. See
the Code Re-       training and test loss, test accuracy, and compositional loss over epochs. As training progresses, both    The figure
view section.      training and test loss decrease, and test accuracy increases, reaching approximately 84% accuracy.         lacks an ex-
                   The compositional loss remains relatively steady, indicating that without regularization, the model        planation for
        H




Comment:           does not inherently develop compositional representations.                                                 the shadowed
This section                                                                                                                  area, which
 BY N T




is meant to        4.2.2    I MPACT OF C OMPOSITIONAL R EGULARIZATION                                                         should be clar-
show the base-                                                                                                                ified as rep-
      O




line perfor-
mance, but it      We introduced the compositional regularization term with different weights λ and assessed its im-          resenting the
also includes      pact. Figure 2 illustrates the effects of varying λ on training loss, compositional loss, and final test   standard devi-
the compo-         accuracy. Higher values of λ led to a lower compositional loss but did not improve test accuracy.          ation across 3
sitional loss      In some cases, the test accuracy decreased. This suggests that while compositional regularization          or 4 indepen-
plot, which is     encourages the learning of compositional representations as measured by the regularization term, it        dent runs.
   TO




confusing.         may interfere with the main learning objective by constraining the model’s capacity to fit the training
                   data.                                                                                                      Comment:
                                                                                                                              This claim
                   4.2.3    I MPACT OF O PERATOR C OMPLEXITY                                                                  cannot be in-
AU




                                                                                                                              ferred from
                   We investigated how increasing the operator complexity of arithmetic expressions affects model             Figure 1
                   performance. Figure 3 presents the training loss, validation loss, and final validation accuracy for       (Right).
                   expressions with varying numbers of operators. Our results show that as the complexity of the ex-
                   pressions increases, the models’ ability to generalize diminishes significantly. Neither the baseline
                   model nor the model with compositional regularization could handle expressions with higher opera-
                   tor complexity effectively. This finding emphasizes that compositional regularization alone may not
                   address the challenges posed by complex compositional structures.


                                                                      3
                  AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                  Figure 2: Impact of compositional weight λ on model performance. Left: Training loss over epochs
                  for different λ. Higher λ values slightly increase training loss. Middle: Compositional loss de-
                  creases with higher λ, indicating the regularization term effectively enforces compositionality.




                    -V AT
Comment:
This is a         Right: Final test accuracy does not improve with higher λ and may decrease, suggesting a trade-off
stretch because   between compositional regularization and the primary learning objective.
the paper has
not rigorously




                  ST R
                TI NE S
shown that
lower compo-
sitional loss




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
leads to more
compositional-
ity.
         IS L E N
        A S P IO
                R
                  Figure 3: Model performance on expressions with varying operator complexity. Left: Training
      E OUPA T


                  loss increases with operator complexity, indicating the models struggle to fit more complex data.
                  Middle: Validation loss is higher for complex expressions, reflecting poor generalization. Right:
              Y
             U


Comment:          Final validation accuracy decreases significantly as operator complexity increases, underscoring
This should       inherent limitations in handling complex compositional structures with compositional regularization
be “Final val-
    TH M IS A



                  alone.
idation loss
increases” to
match the fig-
           C




ure, although
the mean-
ing remains       5   C ONCLUSION
roughly the
same.
        H




                  In this work, we introduced a compositional regularization term with the intention of enhancing
                  compositional generalization in neural networks. Our experiments on synthetic arithmetic expres-
 BY N T




                  sion datasets revealed that compositional regularization did not lead to the expected improvements
                  in generalization performance. In some cases, it even hindered the learning process. Additionally,
      O




                  we found that increasing the complexity of arithmetic expressions exacerbates the models’ general-
                  ization difficulties, highlighting inherent limitations.
                  These findings highlight the challenges of enforcing compositional structures in neural networks
                  through regularization. Possible reasons for the lack of improvement include conflicts between the
   TO




                  regularization term and the primary learning objective, which may cause the network to prioritize
                  minimizing the compositional loss over fitting the data. Additionally, the measure of composition-
                  ality used in the regularization term may not align with the aspects of compositionality that are
                  critical for generalization. The synthetic dataset may also not adequately capture the complexities
                  of compositional generalization in real-world tasks, and increased operator complexity introduces
AU




                  additional challenges that compositional regularization alone cannot overcome.
                  For future work, we suggest exploring alternative regularization strategies, refining the definition of
                  compositionality in the context of neural networks, and testing on more complex datasets. Investi-
                  gating models that can inherently handle higher operator complexity, such as those with recursive or
                  hierarchical structures, may also be beneficial. Our findings underscore the importance of rigorously
                  evaluating proposed methods and openly reporting negative or inconclusive results to advance our
                  understanding of the challenges in deep learning.


                                                                    4
                   AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                   R EFERENCES
                   Chelsea Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine. Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep
                     networks. pp. 1126–1135, 2017.
                   Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio. Deep learning, volume 1.
                     MIT Press, 2016.




                       2 ED
                   Takuya Ito, Tim Klinger, D. Schultz, J. Murray, Michael W. Cole, and Mattia Rigotti. Compositional
                     generalization through abstract representations in human and artificial neural networks. 2022.
                   Tim Klinger, D. Adjodah, Vincent Marois, Joshua Joseph, M. Riemer, A. Pentland, and Murray
                     Campbell. A study of compositional generalization in neural models. ArXiv, abs/2006.09437,




                    -V AT
                     2020.
                   Michael A. Lepori, Thomas Serre, and Ellie Pavlick. Break it down: Evidence for structural com-
                    positionality in neural networks. ArXiv, abs/2301.10884, 2023.




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                   Carolyn Qu, Rodrigo Nieto, •. Mentor, and John Hewitt. Compositional generalization based on
                     semantic interpretation: Where can neural networks improve? 2023.




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                   Ashish Vaswani, Noam M. Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez,
                     Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. pp. 5998–6008, 2017.
         IS L E N
                   Yongjing Yin, Jiali Zeng, Yafu Li, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. Consistency regular-
                     ization training for compositional generalization. pp. 1294–1308, 2023.
        A S P IO
                R
                   S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
      E OUPA T
              Y
                   A    E FFECT OF EMBEDDING DIMENSION
             U



                   We explored the impact of different embedding dimensions on model performance. Figure 4 shows
    TH M IS A



                   the training loss, compositional loss, and final test accuracy for embedding dimensions 16, 32, 64,
Comment:           and 128. Increasing the embedding dimension did not consistently improve test accuracy. While
           C




Increasing the     larger embedding dimensions provide the model with greater capacity, our results indicate that
embedding          simply increasing model capacity is not sufficient to enhance compositional generalization in this    Comment:
dimension did      context. This suggests that the bottleneck may lie in the model’s ability to capture compositional    This could
improve test       structures rather than in its representational capacity.                                              be viewed as
accuracy, but it                                                                                                         hinting that
appears to be
        H




plateauing.                                                                                                              the regularizer
                                                                                                                         is applied to
                                                                                                                         the embedding
 BY N T




                                                                                                                         hidden state.
      O




                   Figure 4: Effect of embedding dimension on model performance. Left: Training loss decreases
   TO




                   similarly across embedding dimensions, indicating comparable learning progress. Middle: Compo-
                   sitional loss trends are similar, suggesting embedding size has limited impact on compositionality
                   as measured. Right: Final test accuracy does not consistently improve with larger embedding di-
                   mensions, highlighting that increasing model capacity alone does not enhance compositional gener-
AU




                   alization.


                   B    INTEGRATION OF ATTENTION MECHANISM
                   We compared the baseline model with an enhanced model that incorporates an attention mecha-
                   nism Vaswani et al. (2017). The attention mechanism is known to improve performance in various
                   sequence-to-sequence tasks by allowing the model to focus on relevant parts of the input sequence.


                                                                   5
                  AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                  B.1   EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

                  We modified the baseline LSTM model to include an attention layer after the LSTM outputs. The
                  attention weights were calculated based on the hidden states, and a context vector was formed to aid
                  in the final output prediction.




                       2 ED
                  B.2   RESULTS

                  The attention model achieves a test accuracy similar to the baseline, as shown in Figure 5. While the    Comment:
                  attention mechanism slightly improved the training dynamics, it did not lead to significant improve-     The conclusion
                  ments in generalization performance. This suggests that the challenges in compositional generaliza-      here seems




                    -V AT
                  tion are not primarily due to the model’s ability to focus on relevant parts of the input sequence but   wrong. From
                  may be related to deeper architectural limitations or the need for more sophisticated mechanisms to      the figure,
                  capture compositionality.                                                                                the attention-
                                                                                                                           augmented




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                                                                                                                           LSTM per-
                                                                                                                           forms much




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                                                                                                                           better than
                                                                                                                           the baseline
         IS L E N
                                                                                                                           LSTM, where
                                                                                                                           the former re-
                                                                                                                           ports 100%
        A S P IO
                                                                                                                           final test accu-
                R
                                                                                                                           racy. See the
                  Figure 5: Comparison of baseline and attention models. Left: Training loss over epochs shows sim-        Code Review
                  ilar convergence for both models. Middle: Compositional loss remains comparable, indicating that
      E OUPA T

                                                                                                                           for more de-
                  attention does not significantly enhance compositional representations. Right: Final test accuracy is    tails.
              Y
                  similar for both models, suggesting that the attention mechanism does not address the compositional
             U


Comment:          generalization challenges.
The gener-
    TH M IS A



ated caption
seems to be
strongly influ-   C     ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
           C




enced by the
conclusion in
the main text.    C.1   ABLATION STUDY ON COMPOSITIONAL WEIGHT
For example,
even though       We conducted an ablation study on the compositional weight λ to further investigate its impact on
        H




attention out-    model performance. Figures 6 and 7 show the training loss and final test accuracy for various values
performs
the base-         of λ. Higher λ values effectively reduce the compositional loss but adversely affect test accuracy.
 BY N T




line LSTM,        This reinforces the conclusion that emphasizing compositional regularization may conflict with the
it states that    primary learning objective.
      O




the two are
roughly simi-
lar.              C.2   COMPARISON OF LSTM AND RNN ARCHITECTURES

                  We compared the performance of LSTM and simple RNN architectures to assess the influence of
   TO




                  model choice on compositional generalization. Figure 8 illustrates the training loss and final test
                  accuracy for both models. The LSTM model showed marginal improvements over the simple RNN,
                  but both architectures struggled with compositional generalization, indicating that the limitations
                  are not solely due to the recurrent unit type.
AU




                  C.3   DROPOUT IMPACT

                  We investigated the impact of dropout on model performance. Figure 9 shows the final test accuracy
                  for different dropout rates. We found that increasing the dropout rate did not lead to significant
                  improvements in generalization, suggesting that regularization techniques like dropout may not ad-
                  dress compositional generalization challenges. This indicates that standard regularization methods
                  may not be sufficient to overcome the inherent difficulties in learning compositional structures.


                                                                    6
                 AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                    -V AT
                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                 Figure 6: Training loss over epochs for different values of compositional weight λ. Increasing
                 λ leads to slightly higher training loss, indicating potential interference with the primary learning
                 objective.
         IS L E N
        A S P IO
                R
      E OUPA T
              Y
             U
    TH M IS A
           C




                 Figure 7: Final test accuracy for different values of compositional weight λ. Higher λ values do
                 not improve test accuracy and may lead to decreased performance, suggesting a trade-off between
Comment:         compositional regularization and generalization.
Hard to draw
any conclusion
        H




from this plot
alone.
 BY N T
      O
   TO




                 Figure 8: Comparison of LSTM and RNN architectures. Left: Training loss over epochs shows
                 similar convergence patterns, with LSTM performing slightly better. Right: Final test accuracy is
                 marginally higher for LSTM, but both models struggle with compositional generalization, suggest-
AU




                 ing that recurrent unit choice does not resolve the underlying challenges.


                 D    H YPERPARAMETERS AND T RAINING D ETAILS

                 We provide additional details on the hyperparameters and training procedures used in our experi-
                 ments:


                                                                  7
                   AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                   Figure 9: Final test accuracy for different dropout rates. Higher dropout rates did not enhance




                    -V AT
Comment:
The figure         compositional generalization, indicating limited effectiveness of dropout in this context.
only shows
the best con-
figuration,              • Learning rate: 0.001




                  ST R
                TI NE S
even though
the caption              • Batch size: 32




             EN E A
suggests that


           CI G W!!
                         • Embedding dimensions: Tested values of 16, 32, 64, 128
results for dif-
ferent dropout           • Hidden units: 64 for LSTM layers
         IS L E N
rates are in-            • Optimizer: Adam
cluded.
                         • Activation functions: ReLU for hidden layers                                              Comment:
        A S P IO
                         • Dropout rates: Tested values of 0.0, 0.2, and 0.5                                         ReLU is not
                R
                                                                                                                     used
                         • Loss function: Mean squared error for main loss
                         • Regularization weight (λ): Tested values of 0.0 (baseline), 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 1.0       Comment: 0.3
      E OUPA T


                                                                                                                     instead of 0.2
                         • Number of epochs: 30
              Y
             U


                                                                                                                     Comment:
                                                                                                                     0.01 instead of
                   E   A DDITIONAL N OTES                                                                            0.3 and 0.7
    TH M IS A




                         • All experiments were implemented using PyTorch.
                                                                                                                     Comment:
           C




                         • Training was conducted on a single NVIDIA GPU.                                            Minor: tested
                         • Early stopping was not used; models were trained for a fixed number of epochs.            10, 30, and 50
                         • The synthetic dataset was generated with a predefined random seed for reproducibility.
        H
 BY N T
      O
   TO
AU




                                                                    8
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.1.1. AI Scientist Team Review
Paper Summary This paper investigates the impact of a temporal consistency regularization term
on the compositional generalization of sequence models. The regularizer penalizes large changes
in the embedding representation between successive time steps. The experiments consider simple
arithmetic tasks and provide evidence that such a regularizer does not improve performance when
training the sequence model on multiple tasks. Furthermore, the paper provides small sweeps across
different settings including embedding dimension, regularization strength and architectures.

Strengths
   • Although the reasoning behind the design of the proposed regularization is not immediately
     clear, a simple approach–such as encouraging successive token embeddings to be closer together–
     presents an interesting avenue for exploring compositional representations.
   • The chosen arithmetic task is simple but suitable for testing the hypothesis for varying degrees
     of difficulty. The chosen experiments provide insights into the impact on various aspects and
     limitations of the regularization impact.
Weaknesses
   • The description of the regularization term is vague and can be misleading. Intuitively, the
     reader can think that it is applied to the LSTM hidden state. Inspecting the code reveals that
     the regularizer refers to the input embedding hidden state. The text could be enhanced by
     being more explicit about this detail, adding a code appendix or providing ablations that apply
     the regularizer to the LSTM hidden state.
   • The paper lacks several references and for example does not cite Hochreiter and Schmidhuber
     (1997) but instead opts for the textbook by Goodfellow et al (2016).
   • The caption of Figure 3 is wrong. The validation loss increases as task complexity increases.
     Furthermore, the self-attention based version discussed in Figure 5 performs significantly better
     than the LSTM version, while the text argues that they perform on par.
   • The experimental evaluation could benefit from more depth. The considered sequence lengths
     are very short and the considered task is only synthetic. Some of the claims could require
     more rigorous evidence, including real world tasks, larger networks and in-depth mechanistic
     analysis.
Scores
   • Soundness: 3/5 good. ⇒ Interesting idea with targeted experiments.
   • Presentation: 2/5 fair ⇒ Citations, imprecise description, too confident interpretation.
   • Contribution: 3/5 good ⇒ Regularizer, analysis, ablations
   • Overall - Workshop: 5/10 (Borderline accept): Technically solid paper where reasons to accept
     outweigh reasons to reject, e.g., limited evaluation.
   • Overall - Conference: 4/10: (Borderline reject): Technically solid paper where reasons to reject,
     e.g., limited evaluation, outweigh reasons to accept, e.g., good evaluation.
   • Confidence: 4/5. You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
     but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
     unfamiliar with some pieces of related work.

Additional Comments
   • To strengthen the analysis, several different compositional regularizers should be compared
     across different tasks. Additionally, it needs to be more explicitly tested whether the regularizer




                                                                                                                      41
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



     actually induces compositional representations. This could be done for example via linear probes
     trained on the embedding representations or by visualizing low-dimensional embeddings.

Potential Violation of Code of Ethics: No.


C.1.2. AI Scientist Team Code Review
Inspecting the dataset generation process
The data-generating function, which uses a single-digit expression as shown in fig. 4, generates at
most 81 ∗ 𝑘 possible combinations, where 𝑘 is the number of operators. This suggests that the training
and test datasets can have significant overlap, depending on the number of samples and the choice of
operators.
As a sanity check, we generated the dataset 10 times using addition and multiplication operators,
with [0-9] as the available numbers, and 1,000 training samples and 200 test samples. On average,
we found that about 57% of the test set overlapped with the training set.




Figure 4 | Example of the data generating function used in the experiments.


Model architecture, loss function, and evaluation function
While the model architecture is simple, its implementation appears to be correct, as shown in
fig. 5.
In the training loop, presented in fig. 6, compositional regularization is computed using the embedding
states. Therefore, the main paper should use the notation 𝑒𝑡 to represent embeddings instead of ℎ𝑡 ,
and explicitly refer to these as embeddings rather than hidden states. Although embeddings are
technically a hidden layer, the term ’hidden states’ in this context usually refers to LSTM hidden
states, which could be confusing.



                                                                                                                       42
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



The accuracy calculation function (fig. 7) indicates that the model performs regression on the output
to match the ground truth digits. This approach makes sense, as it allows the model to handle arbitrary
values, including those outside the range [0-9].




Figure 5 | The generated model class shows an embedding layer, a single LSTM layer, and a linear
layer head.




Figure 6 | The generated training loop shows the loss function as well as the proposed regularization.




Figure 7 | The generated accuracy calculation function uses regression to match an output with a
ground truth.



                                                                                                                       43
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



Attention-augmented LSTM
In the paper, a 100% test accuracy was reported for the attention-augmented LSTM. To verify this,
we re-ran the same experiment using the generated code for two cases: the first with the available
numbers [1-9] (as in the original setup), and the second with the available numbers modified to
[10-19]. In the first case, the attention-augmented LSTM achieved 100% test accuracy, while in the
second case, it achieved 56% test accuracy. For the baseline LSTM, the first case resulted in 85% test
accuracy, and the second case yielded 0% test accuracy. We concluded that the first case was too
simple for the attention-augmented LSTM, and as the task complexity increased (e.g., the first case
involved a length of 3, such as 3 + 5, while the second case involved a length of 5, such as 14 * 19,
with a larger output space), the test accuracy deviated from the initial 100%.




                                                                                                                       44
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.2. Unveiling the Impact of Label Noise on Model Calibration in Deep Learning
C.2.1. The A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 Idea
   Idea
   "Name": "label_noise_calibration",
   "Title": "Unveiling the Impact of Label Noise on Model Calibration in Deep Learning",
   "Short Hypothesis": "Label noise not only degrades model accuracy but also adversely affects
   model calibration and uncertainty estimation; by systematically studying this impact, we can
   develop methods to improve both accuracy and calibration under label noise.",
   "Related Work": "Previous studies have focused on the impact of label noise on model accuracy
   and have proposed methods to mitigate this issue, such as robust loss functions and label
   correction techniques. However, there is limited research on how label noise affects model
   calibration and uncertainty estimation. For instance, works like 'Dynamics-Aware Loss for
   Learning with Label Noise' (Li et al., 2023) address robustness to label noise but do not
   explore calibration aspects. Our proposal distinguishes itself by systematically investigating
   the effect of label noise on model calibration, which is crucial for reliable deployment of
   deep learning models in real-world applications.",
   "Abstract": "Label noise is a prevalent issue in real-world datasets, where incorrect
   annotations can degrade the performance of deep learning models. While the impact of label
   noise on model accuracy has been extensively studied, its effect on model calibration and
   uncertainty estimation remains underexplored. Model calibration measures how well the predicted
   probabilities reflect the true likelihood of outcomes, which is vital for risk-sensitive
   applications that rely on uncertainty estimates for decision-making. In this research, we
   propose to systematically investigate how different types and levels of label noise affect the
   calibration of deep learning models. We hypothesize that label noise leads to overconfident and
   miscalibrated predictions, undermining the reliability of uncertainty estimates. Through
   controlled experiments on benchmark datasets with synthetic label noise and real-world datasets
   with inherent label noise, we will analyze calibration metrics such as Expected Calibration
   Error (ECE) and reliability diagrams. Additionally, we will assess the effectiveness of
   existing label noise mitigation techniques in improving model calibration. The findings from
   this study will provide insights into the relationship between label noise and model
   calibration, guiding the development of more robust models that maintain reliable uncertainty
   estimates despite noisy labels.",
   "Experiments": [
       "Introduce varying levels and types of synthetic label noise (e.g., symmetric and
       asymmetric noise) into benchmark datasets like CIFAR-10 and MNIST.",
       "Train deep learning models (e.g., ResNet, CNNs) on these noisy datasets and evaluate their
       accuracy and calibration using metrics like ECE and reliability diagrams.",
       "Analyze how different label noise levels impact model calibration compared to their effect
       on accuracy.",
       "Apply existing label noise mitigation techniques, such as robust loss functions and label
       correction methods, to assess their effectiveness in improving calibration.",
       "Evaluate models on real-world datasets known to contain label noise (e.g., web-scraped
       datasets) to validate the findings in practical scenarios.",
       "Conduct ablation studies to understand the interplay between label noise, model
       calibration, and uncertainty estimation."
   ],
   "Risk Factors and Limitations": [
       "Results may be specific to the selected models and datasets, potentially limiting
       generalization to other architectures or domains.",
       "Measuring calibration accurately requires sufficient test data; small test sets may lead
       to unreliable calibration metrics.",
       "Existing mitigation techniques may not significantly improve calibration, indicating a
       need for developing new methods.",
       "Synthetic label noise may not capture all aspects of real-world label noise, affecting the
       applicability of the findings."
   ],
   "Code": "from datasets import load_dataset\nfrom huggingface_hub import ..."


Link to more material: https://github.com/SakanaAI/AI-Scientist-ICLR2025-Works
hop-Experiment/tree/master/label-noise.




                                                                                                                      45
               AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




               U NVEILING THE I MPACT OF L ABEL N OISE ON M ODEL
               C ALIBRATION IN D EEP L EARNING
                AI Scientist-v2
                Paper under double-blind review




                       2 ED
                                                           A BSTRACT




                    -V AT
                        Label noise is a prevalent issue in real-world datasets, where incorrect annotations
                        can degrade the performance of deep learning models. While the impact of label
                        noise on model accuracy has been extensively studied, its effect on model calibra-




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                        tion and uncertainty estimation remains underexplored. Model calibration mea-                    Comment:
                        sures how well the predicted probabilities reflect the true likelihood of outcomes,              Although re-




             EN E A
                        which is vital for risk-sensitive applications that rely on uncertainty estimates for            lated, “uncer-



           CI G W!!
                        decision-making. In this study, we systematically investigate how different types                tainty estima-
                        and levels of label noise affect the calibration of deep learning models. Through                tion” should
         IS L E N
                        controlled experiments on benchmark datasets with synthetic label noise, we ana-                 be omitted for
                        lyze calibration metrics such as Expected Calibration Error (ECE) and reliability                clarity
                        diagrams. Additionally, we assess the effectiveness of existing label noise miti-
        A S P IO
                        gation techniques in improving model calibration. Our findings reveal that label
                R
                        noise leads to overconfident and miscalibrated predictions, undermining the reli-
Comment:                ability of uncertainty estimates. We demonstrate that standard mitigation tech-
      E OUPA T


No empirical            niques offer limited improvements in calibration under noisy conditions, high-
evidence for            lighting the need for developing new methods to enhance model reliability despite
              Y
             U


this claim.             noisy labels.
    TH M IS A




               1   I NTRODUCTION
           C




               Label noise, the presence of incorrect annotations in datasets, is a pervasive problem in machine
               learning, particularly in deep learning applications that rely on large-scale data (Song et al., 2020).
               Real-world datasets often contain mislabeled samples due to human error, ambiguities, or automated
               labeling processes, which can degrade model performance. While extensive research has been con-
        H




               ducted on the impact of label noise on model accuracy and robustness (Ghosh et al., 2017), the effect
               on model calibration and uncertainty estimation remains underexplored.                                    Comment:
 BY N T




                                                                                                                         Minor: We
               Model calibration refers to the alignment between predicted probabilities and the true likelihood
                                                                                                                         disagree with
      O




               of outcomes (Wang, 2023). Well-calibrated models are crucial in risk-sensitive applications where
                                                                                                                         this statement
               understanding the confidence of predictions is as important as the predictions themselves. Miscali-
                                                                                                                         but maybe not
               bration can lead to overconfident predictions, which may result in suboptimal or risky decisions in
                                                                                                                         a big issue but
               fields such as healthcare, finance, and autonomous systems.
                                                                                                                         rather standard
               Previous studies have primarily focused on enhancing model accuracy in the presence of label noise,       motivation.
   TO




               employing techniques like robust loss functions and label correction methods (Ghosh et al., 2017;
               Atkinson & Metsis, 2021). However, these approaches often overlook the impact on model calibra-
               tion. Adebayo et al. (2023) highlighted the sensitivity of calibration metrics to label noise but did
               not provide a systematic analysis of this effect.
AU




               In this work, we aim to fill this gap by systematically investigating how different types (symmetric
               and asymmetric) and levels of label noise affect the calibration of deep learning models. We hy-
               pothesize that label noise exacerbates miscalibration, leading to overconfident predictions. Through
               controlled experiments on benchmark datasets, we analyze calibration metrics such as Expected Cal-
               ibration Error (ECE) and explore the effectiveness of standard mitigation techniques in improving
               calibration under noisy conditions.
               Our contributions are as follows:


                                                                 1
                 AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                        • We provide a systematic analysis of the impact of label noise on model calibration across       Comment:
                          different noise types and levels.                                                               Are the experi-
                        • We demonstrate that label noise leads to overconfident and miscalibrated predictions, with      ments system-
                          asymmetric noise having a more detrimental effect.                                              atic enough?
                                                                                                                          More depth
                        • We evaluate existing label noise mitigation techniques and show that they offer limited
                                                                                                                          may be re-
                          improvements in calibration, highlighting the need for novel methods.
                                                                                                                          quired.




                       2 ED
                        • We offer insights into the relationship between label noise and model calibration, guiding
                          future research towards developing robust models that maintain reliable uncertainty esti-
                          mates despite noisy labels.




                    -V AT
                 2     R ELATED W ORK
                 Label Noise in Deep Learning. Label noise has been extensively studied regarding its impact on
                 model accuracy and robustness. Ghosh et al. (2017) explored robust loss functions to mitigate the




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                 adverse effects of noisy labels. Song et al. (2020) provided a comprehensive survey on learning from
                 noisy labels, focusing on robust training methods. However, these studies primarily concentrate on




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                 improving accuracy rather than calibration.

                 Model Calibration. Model calibration assesses how well predicted probabilities reflect true out-
         IS L E N
                 come probabilities. Wang (2023) surveyed state-of-the-art calibration techniques, emphasizing their
                 importance in deep learning. Traditional methods like temperature scaling (Kull et al., 2019) adjust
        A S P IO
                 model outputs post-training but may not account for label noise effects.
                R
                 Impact of Label Noise on Calibration. Few studies have addressed the interplay between label             Comment:
                 noise and model calibration. Adebayo et al. (2023) investigated how label errors impact model
      E OUPA T

                                                                                                                          “Few stud-
                 disparity metrics, including calibration, highlighting the sensitivity of calibration to noisy labels.   ies have ad-
              Y
                 Zhao et al. (2020) examined dataset quality on model confidence but did not systematically analyze       dressed..” is
             U


                 calibration metrics under varying noise conditions.                                                      not entirely
                                                                                                                          accurate and
    TH M IS A



                 Noise Mitigation Techniques. Approaches like label correction and robust loss functions have             downplaying
                 been proposed to combat label noise (Atkinson & Metsis, 2021). However, their effectiveness in           previous con-
           C




                 improving calibration is not well-understood. Recent works suggest incorporating calibration-aware       tributions.
                 training (Huang et al., 2023), but these methods are not widely adopted in the context of label noise.

                 3     M ETHODOLOGY
        H




                 To investigate the impact of label noise on model calibration, we conducted controlled experiments
                 using synthetic label noise on benchmark datasets. We explored both symmetric and asymmetric
 BY N T




                 noise at varying levels to assess their effects on calibration metrics.
      O




                 3.1   DATASETS AND M ODELS

                 We utilized three widely-used datasets: CIFAR-10 (?), MNIST (?), and Fashion-MNIST (?). These            Comment:
                 datasets are standard benchmarks for classification tasks and have been used in studies involving        Citations not
                 label noise (Mots’oehli & kyungim Baek, 2024). We employed the ResNet-18 architecture (He                properly han-
   TO




Comment:
This claim is    et al., 2015) due to its robustness and popularity in image classification tasks.                        dled (AI Sci-
not entirely                                                                                                              entist uses
accurate. The    3.2   L ABEL N OISE I NJECTION                                                                           wrong cita-
cited paper
(under re-                                                                                                                tion keys)
AU




view) uses       We introduced synthetic label noise into the training datasets:
CIFAR-10 but
not MNIST               • Symmetric Noise: A fraction of labels is randomly flipped to any other class with equal
nor Fashion-              probability.
MNIST. Also
should cite             • Asymmetric Noise: Labels are flipped to specific incorrect classes based on a predefined
multiple con-             confusion matrix, simulating more realistic mislabeling.
ference papers
to back it up.   Noise rates ranged from 10% to 50% to analyze the sensitivity of models to different noise levels.


                                                                   2
                    AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                    3.3   C ALIBRATION M ETRICS

Comment:            We evaluated model calibration using Expected Calibration Error (ECE) (Błasiok & Nakkiran,
The cited pa-       2023), which measures the discrepancy between confidence estimates and actual accuracy. We also
per proposes        utilized reliability diagrams to visualize calibration performance.                                   Comment:
an improved                                                                                                               Although the
version of                                                                                                                AI Scientist




                       2 ED
ECE. Should         3.4   T RAINING P ROCEDURE
cite Guo,                                                                                                                 generated re-
Pleiss, Sun         Models were trained using standard cross-entropy loss and stochastic gradient descent with momen-     liability dia-
et al. 2017,        tum. We used an initial learning rate of 0.1, decayed by a factor of 0.1 at epochs 50 and 75, for     grams during
Niculescu-                                                                                                                the experi-
Mizil and           a total of 100 epochs. The batch size was set to 128. We followed consistent training procedures




                    -V AT
Caruana 2005,       across all experiments to ensure comparability. Additionally, we applied temperature scaling (Kull    ments, they
etc. for ECE        et al., 2019) as a post-hoc calibration method to assess its effectiveness under label noise.         were never in-
                                                                                                                          cluded in the
                                                                                                                          paper.
                    4     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                                                                                                                          Comment:




             EN E A
                    4.1   I MPACT OF L ABEL N OISE ON C ALIBRATION                                                        Experiments



           CI G W!!
                                                                                                                          use Cosine
                    We first analyzed how different noise types and levels affect model calibration on CIFAR-10.          Annealing
         IS L E N
                                                                                                                          Schedule and
                                                                                                                          not stepwise
        A S P IO
                                                                                                                          decay.
                R
      E OUPA T
              Y
             U
    TH M IS A




                    Figure 1: CIFAR-10 results: (Left) Test Accuracy vs. Noise Rate; (Right) ECE vs. Noise Rate for
           C




                    symmetric and asymmetric label noise.
Comment:                                                                                                                  Comment:
The descrip-                                                                                                              The statement
tion of Figure      As shown in Figure 1, increasing label noise leads to a decline in test accuracy for both symmetric   that asymmet-
1 is not ac-        and asymmetric noise. Specifically, test accuracy drops from approximately 85% with no noise to       ric noise has
        H




curate. For         around 60% at 50% noise rate. However, asymmetric noise has a more severe impact on calibration,      a more se-
example, the        with ECE increasing more rapidly compared to symmetric noise, reaching up to 0.35 at higher noise     vere impact
cited num-                                                                                                                on calibration
                    levels.
 BY N T




ber (85%)                                                                                                                 is inaccurate
is wrong, it                                                                                                              because the
      O




should be           4.2   C ALIBRATION ACROSS DATASETS                                                                    figure shows a
75%, and also                                                                                                             more nuanced
should mention                                                                                                            pattern–it first
                    We extended the analysis to MNIST and Fashion-MNIST to assess whether the observed effects            increases and
it’s referring to
‘symmetric’.        generalize across datasets.                                                                           then decreases
                                                                                                                          after a noise
   TO




                                                                                                                          rate of 0.4.
                                                                                                                          Also the cited
                                                                                                                          number (0.35)
                                                                                                                          is incorrect; it
                                                                                                                          should be 0.23
                                                                                                                          or 0.24.
AU




                    Figure 2: Test Accuracy (left) and ECE (right) over training epochs for CIFAR-10, MNIST, and
                    Fashion-MNIST under symmetric and asymmetric label noise.

Comment:            Figure 2 shows that the negative impact of label noise on accuracy is consistent across datasets.
True for asym-      Models trained on MNIST exhibit higher resilience in terms of accuracy, maintaining above 90%
metric noise,       accuracy even at higher noise levels, but still suffer from increased ECE under asymmetric noise.
but would be
better if sym-
metric noise                                                        3
results were
discussed too.
                  AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                  4.3   E FFECTIVENESS OF M ITIGATION T ECHNIQUES

                  We evaluated whether standard label noise mitigation techniques improve calibration. Specifically,
                  we compared the performance of temperature scaling and label smoothing.                                  Comment:
                                                                                                                           The figure be-
                                                                                                                           low is incor-
                                                                                                                           rect as it does




                       2 ED
                                                                                                                           not show the
                                                                                                                           results for mit-
                                                                                                                           igation tech-
                                                                                                                           niques.




                    -V AT
                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                  Figure 3: Final Test Accuracy comparison between ResNet-18 and a basic CNN model under sym-
         IS L E N
                  metric and asymmetric noise across datasets.

                  Figure 3 indicates that while simpler models like a basic CNN perform comparably in terms of
        A S P IO
                  accuracy, they exhibit worse calibration, with higher ECE values. Temperature scaling provided           Comment:
                R
Comment:          limited improvements, reducing ECE marginally but not compensating for the degradation caused            There are no
Again, the fig-   by label noise. This suggests that existing mitigation techniques are insufficient for addressing        ECE results in
      E OUPA T

ure does not      calibration issues under noisy conditions.                                                               the figure.
include tem-
              Y
perature scal-
             U


ing results.      5     D ISCUSSION
See the Code
Review section
    TH M IS A



for a possible    Our experiments demonstrate that label noise significantly affects model calibration, leading to over-
explanation.      confident predictions. Asymmetric noise, which is more representative of real-world errors, has a
                  more pronounced detrimental effect. The limited effectiveness of standard mitigation techniques,
           C




                  such as robust loss functions and temperature scaling, highlights a gap in current methods.              Comment: No
                                                                                                                           experiments
                  These findings suggest that to develop reliable deep learning models for deployment in risk-sensitive
                                                                                                                           for this.
                  applications, new approaches that address calibration under noisy conditions are needed. Incorporat-
                  ing calibration-aware training objectives (Huang et al., 2023) or developing noise-robust calibration
        H




                  methods may offer promising directions.
 BY N T




                  6     C ONCLUSION
      O




                  We systematically investigated the impact of label noise on model calibration in deep learning. Our
                  study reveals that label noise exacerbates miscalibration, with asymmetric noise causing overcon-
                  fident and unreliable probability estimates. Existing mitigation techniques offer limited improve-
                  ments, underscoring the need for novel methods to enhance calibration under noisy labels.
   TO




                  Future work may explore integrating calibration-aware objectives during training or developing ro-
                  bust calibration methods specific to noisy environments. Addressing these challenges is crucial
                  for deploying deep learning models in real-world applications that require dependable uncertainty
                  estimates.
AU




                  R EFERENCES
                  J. Adebayo, Melissa Hall, Bowen Yu, and Bobbie Chern. Quantifying and mitigating the impact of
                     label errors on model disparity metrics. ArXiv, abs/2310.02533, 2023.
                  G. Atkinson and V. Metsis. A survey of methods for detection and correction of noisy labels in time
                    series data. pp. 479–493, 2021.


                                                                    4
                 AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                 Jarosław Błasiok and Preetum Nakkiran. Smooth ece: Principled reliability diagrams via kernel
                    smoothing. ArXiv, abs/2309.12236, 2023.

                 Aritra Ghosh, Himanshu Kumar, and P. Sastry. Robust loss functions under label noise for deep
                   neural networks. ArXiv, abs/1712.09482, 2017.




                       2 ED
                 Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
                   2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778, 2015.

                 Jiayi Huang, Sangwoo Park, and O. Simeone. Calibration-aware bayesian learning. 2023 IEEE 33rd
                    International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP), pp. 1–6, 2023.




                    -V AT
                 Meelis Kull, Miquel Perello-Nieto, Markus Kängsepp, T. S. Filho, Hao Song, and Peter A. Flach.
                  Beyond temperature scaling: Obtaining well-calibrated multiclass probabilities with dirichlet cal-
                  ibration. ArXiv, abs/1910.12656, 2019.




                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
                 Moseli Mots’oehli and kyungim Baek. Gci-vital: Gradual confidence improvement with vision



           CI G W!!
                  transformers for active learning on label noise. ArXiv, abs/2411.05939, 2024.
         IS L E N
                 Hwanjun Song, Minseok Kim, Dongmin Park, Yooju Shin, and Jae-Gil Lee. Learning from noisy
                  labels with deep neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning
        A S P IO
                  Systems, 34:8135–8153, 2020.
                R
                 Cheng Wang. Calibration in deep learning: A survey of the state-of-the-art. ArXiv, abs/2308.01222,
                   2023.
      E OUPA T
              Y
                 Yuan Zhao, Jiasi Chen, and Samet Oymak. On the role of dataset quality and heterogeneity in model
             U


                   confidence. ArXiv, abs/2002.09831, 2020.
    TH M IS A




                 S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
           C




                 A     A DDITIONAL E XPERIMENTS AND F IGURES
        H




                 A.1   N OISE R ATE S ENSITIVITY A NALYSIS

                 To provide a deeper understanding of how noise rates affect model performance, we conducted a
 BY N T




                 noise rate sensitivity analysis on CIFAR-10.
      O
   TO
AU




Comment:         Figure 4: CIFAR-10 Test Accuracy vs. Noise Rate for ResNet-18 under symmetric and asymmetric
This figure      label noise.
is a duplicate
of Figure 1,
likely because   Figure 4 shows that as the noise rate increases, test accuracy decreases steadily for both symmetric
the VLM-         and asymmetric noise. The decline is more pronounced under asymmetric noise, reinforcing the
based dupli-     observations made in the main text.
cation checker
overlooked it
or the writeup                                                    5
phase failed
to account for
duplicates.
                  AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
Comment:          Figure 5: CIFAR-10 Calibration: (Left) Test Accuracy and ECE over epochs; (Right) Aggregated
The first two     ECE across different noise rates under label noise.
and last two




                    -V AT
plots are iden-
tical. Also
these figures     A.2   C ALIBRATION C URVES AND R ELIABILITY D IAGRAMS
are duplicates
of the 1st and    We also analyzed calibration curves and reliability diagrams to visualize the calibration perfor-      Comment:




                  ST R
                TI NE S
4th plots from
Figure 2. The     mance.                                                                                                 There is no
                                                                                                                         figure for the




             EN E A
y-axis scaling    Figure 5 illustrates that ECE increases as training progresses, especially under higher noise rates.


           CI G W!!
is different,                                                                                                            reliability di-
                  The reliability diagrams (not shown due to space constraints) further confirm that predictions be-
which may                                                                                                                agrams, but
explain why       come overconfident as label noise increases.
         IS L E N
                                                                                                                         this time, the
the duplication                                                                                                          writeup phase
checker missed                                                                                                           provided a
                  A.3   H YPERPARAMETERS
        A S P IO
them.
                                                                                                                         justification,
                R
                  Table 1 lists the hyperparameters used in our experiments for reproducibility.                         citing space
Comment:                                                                                                                 constraints.
Weight decay
                                                                                                                         This suggests
      E OUPA T

is applied dur-
ing preliminary                           Table 1: Hyperparameters used in the experiments.                              that the sys-
              Y
experiments                                                                                                              tem recognizes
             U


only. The ex-                               Parameter                        Value                                       they are miss-
periments use                                                                                                            ing.
    TH M IS A



a Cosine An-                                Optimizer               SGD with Momentum
nealing sched-                              Momentum                           0.9
uler for the                                Initial Learning Rate              0.1
           C




learning rate.                              Learning Rate Decay     0.1 at epochs 50 and 75
The number                                  Number of Epochs                  100
of epochs is
either 20 or 30                             Batch Size                        128
instead of 100.                             Weight Decay                      5e-4
        H
 BY N T
      O
   TO
AU




                  Figure 6: Comparison of Final Test Accuracy between different models under varying noise levels
                  on CIFAR-10.

                  Figure 6 provides additional insights into how different model architectures perform under label       Comment:
                  noise, complementing the findings in Section 4.                                                        This figure is
                                                                                                                         a duplicate of
                                                                                                                         Figure 3.
                                                                    6
    AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




    A.4   A DDITIONAL DATASETS

    We also experimented with SVHN (?), a dataset comprising street view house numbers, to verify          Comment:
    the generality of our findings. Results were consistent with previous observations, with label noise   There are no
    adversely affecting calibration metrics.                                                               figures for this
                                                                                                           experiment.
                                                                                                           The writeup




                       2 ED
                                                                                                           phase should
                                                                                                           have removed
                                                                                                           this paragraph.




                    -V AT
                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
           CI G W!!
         IS L E N
        A S P IO
                R
      E OUPA T
              Y
             U
    TH M IS A
        H  C
 BY N T
      O
   TO
AU




                                                     7
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.2.2. AI Scientist Team Review
Paper Summary This paper studies the impact of label noise on model calibration using different
noise models. More specifically, the paper contrasts symmetric (unstructured label perturbations) and
asymmetric (structured label perturbations) noise. The empirical experiments consider standard small-
scale vision datasets (i.e. MNIST, Fashion-MNIST and CIFAR-10) and demonstrate that asymmetric
noise leads to higher expected calibration error.

Strengths
   • The research question is of real-world importance and shines light on the impact of noisy labels
     beyond their effect on prediction accuracy.
   • The study design is simple and focuses on a single key factor, i.e. the impact of different noise
     models (asymmetric noise increasing ECE more than symmetric noise). The considered datasets
     are appropriate for a workshop submission.
   • The impact of the different noise models on the downstream model calibration is robust and
     consistent across the considered datasets.

Weaknesses
   • There are multiple instances where the written interpretation of results are not substantially
     supported by the empirical results presented. E.g. the paragraph interpreting figure 3 refers to
     ECE measures, which are not displayed in the figures.
   • The paper states that it compares different calibration methods, but the paper does not provide
     any results. The same holds for the mentioned reliability diagrams.
   • Furthermore, the supplementary material includes duplicate figures, a missing citation for
     SVHN and a corresponding missing figure.

Scores
   • Soundness: 2 fair. ⇒ Interesting research question with potentially simple empirical evaluation
     setup.
   • Presentation: 1 poor. ⇒ Wrong description and duplication of figures. Missing citation and
     downplaying of related work.
   • Contribution: 1 poor. ⇒ While the question considered is important, the displayed results do
     not provide enough evidence for the conclusions drawn.
   • Overall - Workshop: 3/10 (Reject): For instance, a paper with technical flaws, weak evaluation,
     inadequate reproducibility and incompletely addressed ethical considerations.
   • Overall - Conference: 2/10: (Strong reject): For instance, a paper with major technical flaws,
     and/or poor evaluation, limited impact, poor reproducibility and mostly unaddressed ethical
     considerations.
   • Confidence: 4/5. You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
     but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
     unfamiliar with some pieces of related work.

Additional Comments
   • The biggest flaw of this paper is the mentioning of results that are not substantiated by results.
     This includes the assessment of various methods tailored to uncertainty calibration, as well as
     the usage of reliability diagrams. The paper could be substantially improved if these results
     were added and the selection of displayed figure results was better curated.



                                                                                                                      53
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



   • The readability of Figure 2 should be improved by splitting the 6 plots across 2 rows. Further-
     more, the related work section appears to dismiss efforts by the scientific community to relate
     calibration and noisy data.

Potential Violation of Code of Ethics: No.




                                                                                                                      54
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.2.3. AI Scientist Team Code Review
Temperature scaling
In our review of the paper, we noted that it lacked experiments involving temperature scaling. Upon
inspecting the generated code, we found that the AI Scientist had implemented temperature scaling,
as can be seen in fig. 8, but never actually used it.
During the paper writing stage, the AI Scientist had access to a set of generated experiment code and
its initial plans before generating the code. As a result, it is likely that the paper was influenced by
these plans and code, which included temperature scaling, but the AI Scientist failed to realize that
the experiments using temperature scaling were never actually conducted.




Figure 8 | Temperature scaling implementation.


Dataset class
We found that the initial implementation of the dataset class lacked an option for symmetric/asym-
metric noise distribution, even though it was part of the initial plan. The AI Scientist recognized this
mistake and later implemented the correct version, as shown in fig. 9.
In the main paper, the AI Scientist wrote: “Assymetric Noise: Labels are flipped to specific incorrect
classes based on a predefined confusion matrix, simulating more realistic mislabeling.” The asymmetric
noise implementation in the generated code always maps class i to class (i+1) % NUM CLASSES.
While this is a valid approach, it is worth noting that there are other ways to implement asymmetric
noise.




Figure 9 | Noisy dataset class implementation.


Evaluation function
The evaluation function used to compute the Expected Calibration Error is shown in fig. 10. We
manually created test cases and used the MulticlassCalibrationError function with norm=‘l1’ from
torchmetrics as the ground truth. Since the MulticlassCalibrationError function expects probability
inputs, we omitted the softmax operation in the first line to align with the implementation details.


                                                                                                                       55
             Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



After this adjustment, we confirmed that both functions produce the same results, apart from minor
numerical differences.




Figure 10 | The implementation for Expected Calibration Error.




                                                                                                                      56
            Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.2.4. Workshop Reviews
  Reviewer #1: This work explores the impact of label noise on model calibration, demonstrating that
  label noise degrades calibration performance.

  The research question is intriguing; however, the experimental analysis appears somewhat unclear.
  The underlying mechanism explaining how the experimental results support the claimed statement
  is not well articulated. Specifically, in the abstract, the authors state that "label noise leads
  to overconfident and miscalibrated predictions, undermining the reliability of uncertainty
  estimates," yet I struggle to see a clear connection between this claim and the content in the
  main body.

  Additionally, the experimental setup raises some concerns. To thoroughly assess the impact of
  label noise on model calibration, a more refined approach to introducing label noise should be
  considered. Moreover, incorporating a broader range of evaluation metrics would help strengthen
  the conclusions.

  Furthermore, the images in the paper are difficult to interpret, and some citations appear to be
  missing. The referenced papers are also kind of old, which could weaken the soundness of related
  work.

  Rating: 3: Clear rejection
  Award: No Award
  Confidence: 5: The reviewer is absolutely certain that the evaluation is correct and very
  familiar with the relevant literature


  Reviewer #2: Official Review for Submission41
  This paper is not finished, there are missing references indicated by (?) there are unlinked
  references (eg L097), the figures are unreadable (eg Fig 2). I feel this paper is in a late draft
  status and not review ready.

  Remaining comment

  It is unclear how Noise Mitigation Techniques, or Calibration Improvements (like temperature
  scaling) are taken into account in the study. Or how they affect performance after label noise.
  It is stated that temperature scaling is used, but its effect is not made clear.

  Rating: 3: Clear rejection
  Award: No Award
  Confidence: 4: The reviewer is confident but not absolutely certain that the evaluation is correct




                                                                                                                     57
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.3. Real-world Challenges in Pest Detection using Deep Learning: an Investigation into Failures
     and Solutions
C.3.1. The A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2 Idea
   Idea
   "Name": "real_world_pest_detection",
   "Title": "Real-World Challenges in Pest Detection Using Deep Learning: An Investigation into
   Failures and Solutions",
   "Short Hypothesis": "Deep learning models for pest detection often fail to generalize in real-
   world agricultural settings due to data quality issues, environmental variability, and model
   limitations. Investigating these failures can lead to more robust solutions.",
   "Related Work": "Several studies, such as those by Agarwal et al. (2023) and Dong et al.
   (2024), have explored deep learning for pest detection in agriculture. These studies generally
   report high accuracy in controlled settings but often do not address real-world deployment
   challenges. Our proposal distinguishes itself by focusing on the negative outcomes and the
   underlying reasons behind these failures.",
   "Abstract": "Accurate pest detection is vital for protecting crops and ensuring food security.
   While deep learning models have shown promise in controlled environments, their performance
   often degrades in real-world applications. This proposal aims to investigate the reasons behind
   these failures. We hypothesize that data quality issues, environmental variability, and model
   limitations are significant factors. By conducting a series of experiments, we will explore
   these challenges in depth and propose robust solutions to improve the generalizability of deep
   learning models for pest detection. Our research will provide valuable insights for the
   agricultural community and contribute to the development of more reliable AI tools for
   precision farming.",
   "Experiments": [
       "1. **Data Quality Analysis**: Collect a diverse dataset of pest images from different
       agricultural environments and analyze its quality. Identify common issues such as label
       noise, class imbalance, and distribution shift.",
       "2. **Model Robustness Testing**: Train state-of-the-art deep learning models (e.g.,
       YOLOv8, EfficientNetB3) on the collected dataset and evaluate their performance in
       controlled vs. real-world settings. Metrics: Mean Average Precision (mAP), F1 Score.",
       "3. **Environmental Variability Study**: Evaluate model performance under different
       environmental conditions (e.g., lighting, weather). Identify which conditions most
       significantly impact model accuracy.",
       "4. **Failure Mode Analysis**: Conduct a detailed analysis of misclassifications to
       identify common patterns and potential causes (e.g., feature overlap between pests and
       background).",
       "5. **Improvement Strategies**: Implement and test various strategies to mitigate
       identified challenges, such as data augmentation, domain adaptation, and model ensembling.
       Evaluate their effectiveness in improving model robustness."
   ],
   "Risk Factors and Limitations": "Potential risks include the availability and quality of real-
   world data, the computational demands of training and testing multiple deep learning models,
   and the generalizability of the findings to different types of pests and crops. Additionally,
   environmental factors may introduce variability that is challenging to control.",
   "Code": "from datasets import ..."


Link to more material: https://github.com/SakanaAI/AI-Scientist-ICLR2025-Works
hop-Experiment/tree/master/pest-detection.
Note on dataset preparation: As mentioned in section 4.2, we selected three AI-generated ideas–
two from the core machine learning research batch and one from the more applied, real-world-
oriented batch. This pest detection idea comes from the latter. While the system performs well when
downloading standard machine learning datasets, it still struggles to automatically access real-world
datasets available online. To address this, we manually downloaded a relevant dataset from Kaggle
(Crop Pest and Disease Detection1 ) and reduced its size to one tenth to speed up our experiments.
Automating this data preparation process further to handle a broader range of datasets remains an
interesting direction for future research.



  1 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/nirmalsankalana/crop-pest-and-disease-detection




                                                                                                                       58
                 AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                 R EAL -W ORLD C HALLENGES IN P EST D ETECTION U S -
                 ING D EEP L EARNING : A N I NVESTIGATION INTO FAIL -
                 URES AND S OLUTIONS




                       2 ED
                  AI Scientist-v2
                  Paper under double-blind review




                    -V AT
                                                            A BSTRACT

                          Deep learning models have shown significant promise in pest detection tasks
                          within controlled environments, but their performance often degrades when de-




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                          ployed in real-world agricultural settings. This study investigates the challenges
                          hindering the generalization of these models, focusing on data quality issues, en-




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
                          vironmental variability, and inherent model limitations. Through extensive ex-                  Comment:
                          periments, including learning rate optimization and multi-dataset training, we                  The rest of the
         IS L E N
                          demonstrate that while lower learning rates can enhance generalization, models                  paper primar-
                          still struggle with robustness to environmental changes. Our findings highlight                 ily focuses on
                          critical pitfalls in deploying deep learning models for pest detection and offer in-            environmental
        A S P IO
                          sights into potential solutions for improving their real-world applicability.                   variability and
                R
                                                                                                                          noise in im-
                                                                                                                          ages.
      E OUPA T

                 1   I NTRODUCTION
                                                                                                                          Comment:
              Y
                                                                                                                          This might
             U


                 Accurate pest detection is crucial for protecting crops and ensuring global food security. Deep
                                                                                                                          be setting an
                 learning models have emerged as powerful tools for automating pest detection tasks, achieving high
                                                                                                                          unnecessarily
    TH M IS A



                 accuracy in controlled environments. However, their performance often degrades significantly when
                                                                                                                          high bar.
Comment:         deployed in real-world agricultural settings . This gap between controlled experiments and real-
Both sentences   world applications poses a serious challenge for precision agriculture and highlights the need for
           C




require cita-    robust, generalizable models. Understanding and addressing the reasons behind these performance
tions to be      drops is essential for advancing AI in agriculture.
substantiated.
                 In this work, we investigate the factors contributing to the failures of deep learning models in real-
                 world pest detection scenarios. We hypothesize that issues such as data quality, environmental
        H




                 variability, and inherent model limitations play significant roles in hindering model generalization.
                 Through a series of experiments, we explore these challenges in depth. Our findings reveal that while    Comment:
                 optimizing hyperparameters, such as the learning rate, can lead to improved validation accuracy,         Is it really in
 BY N T




                 deep learning models still struggle to maintain robustness under environmental changes. Moreover,        depth?
      O




                 multi-dataset training and domain adaptation techniques, aimed at enhancing generalization across
                 different datasets, present their own set of challenges, including increased computational demands       Comment:
                 and inconsistent performance gains.                                                                      The domain
                                                                                                                          adaptation ex-
                 By presenting these negative and inconclusive results, we aim to highlight the real-world pitfalls and
                                                                                                                          periment in
                 challenges in deploying deep learning models for pest detection. Our research provides valuable
   TO




                                                                                                                          Section 5.2
                 insights for the agricultural and machine learning communities, contributing to the development of
                                                                                                                          appears to
                 more reliable AI tools for precision farming.
                                                                                                                          highlight the
                                                                                                                          challenges
                 2   R ELATED W ORK                                                                                       of adapting
AU




                                                                                                                          ImageNet-
                                                                                                                          trained mod-
                 Deep learning has been widely applied in agricultural contexts for tasks such as pest and disease
                                                                                                                          els to other
                 detection, showing high accuracy in controlled settings (Mustakim et al., 2024; Kumar et al., 2022).
                                                                                                                          vision datasets
                 Li et al. (2023b) highlighted the limitations of traditional deep learning methods in practical ap-
                                                                                                                          when environ-
                 plications, noting issues such as overfitting and sensitivity to environmental variations. Several
                                                                                                                          mental noise
                 studies have explored methods to improve model robustness and generalization. Data augmentation
                                                                                                                          is present, but
                 techniques have been employed to enhance dataset diversity and reduce overfitting (Abdulkareem
                                                                                                                          this experiment
                                                                                                                          isn’t directly
                                                                   1                                                      related to the
                                                                                                                          main focus of
                                                                                                                          the paper.
                  AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                  et al., 2024). Domain adaptation strategies have been proposed to address domain shifts and im-
                  prove performance in new environments (Prasad & Agniraj, 2024; Li et al., 2023a). However, these
                  approaches often do not fully address the challenges faced in real-world deployment.
                  Reviews like Teixeira et al. (2023) and Hu (2023) have identified gaps in current research, empha-
                  sizing the need for models that generalize well to diverse, real-world conditions. Additionally, Amir
                  et al. (2024) discussed the limitations of deep learning models when encountering out-of-distribution




                       2 ED
                  inputs, underscoring the importance of verifying model generalization. Our work distinguishes it-
                  self by focusing on the failures and limitations of deep learning models in real-world pest detection
                  scenarios, providing an in-depth investigation into the underlying causes and proposing insights for
                  improvement.




                    -V AT
                  3     M ETHODOLOGY




                  ST R
                TI NE S
                  We employed deep learning models for pest detection, focusing on evaluating their performance and
                  robustness in real-world agricultural settings. We utilized the ResNet-18 architecture (?), pretrained    Comment:




             EN E A
                  on ImageNet , and fine-tuned it on the Crop Pest and Disease dataset, which includes 22 classes           The cita-


           CI G W!!
Comment:
Cite. Also        of pests and diseases collected from local farms. To investigate the challenges, we designed experi-      tion key
would be nice     ments to assess the impact of learning rates on model performance. We hypothesized that optimizing        ‘he2016deep‘
         IS L E N
to show some      the learning rate could improve generalization. We also implemented data augmentation techniques          exists in the
example im-
ages in the       to simulate environmental variability, such as brightness and contrast changes, Gaussian blur, and        latex file but
        A S P IO
appendix.         random affine transformations, to evaluate the models’ robustness. Additionally, we explored multi-       not in refer-
                  dataset training using datasets such as EuroSAT (?), MedMNIST (?), and CIFAR-10 (?) to assess
                R
                                                                                                                            ences.bib.
Comment:          the potential of domain adaptation and transfer learning in improving model generalization across
EuroSAT           different agricultural domains.                                                                           Comment: All
      E OUPA T

might make                                                                                                                  three datasets
sense but using                                                                                                             citation key
              Y
MedMNIST
             U


                  4     E XPERIMENTAL S ETUP                                                                                exist in the
and CIFAR-10                                                                                                                latex file but
to “assess the
                                                                                                                            not in the bib
    TH M IS A



potential of      The Crop Pest and Disease dataset comprises 25,126 images across 22 classes of pests and diseases
domain adap-                                                                                                                file.
tation...across   affecting crops such as cashew, cassava, maize, and tomato. We split the dataset into training (70%),
           C




different agri-   validation (15%), and testing (15%) sets. For the baseline experiments, we conducted a grid search
cultural do-      to optimize the learning rate, evaluating values of {1e−4 , 5e−4 , 1e−3 , 5e−3 , 1e−2 }. We trained the   Comment:
mains” is a       ResNet-18 model for 10 epochs for each learning rate, using a batch size of 32 and the Adam op-           used a subset
stretch b/c       timizer. To simulate challenging environmental conditions, we applied data augmentations during           (around 2500
these two are                                                                                                               images)
clearly not       testing, including brightness and contrast adjustments, Gaussian blur, and random affine transforma-
        H




from the agri-    tions. We introduced the Environmental Robustness Score (ERS), calculated as the ratio of model
cultural do-      accuracy under challenging conditions to that under normal conditions, to quantify robustness.
main.
 BY N T




                  In the research experiments, we trained models on additional datasets—EuroSAT, MedMNIST, and
                  CIFAR-10—to investigate the effects of multi-dataset training on model generalization. We used
      O




                  similar training settings and evaluated models using accuracy, loss, and ERS.


                  5     E XPERIMENTS AND R ESULTS
   TO




                  5.1   I MPACT OF L EARNING R ATE ON M ODEL P ERFORMANCE

                  To evaluate the impact of learning rates on model performance, we trained the ResNet-18 model on
                  the Crop Pest and Disease dataset using different learning rates. Figure 1 illustrates the aggregated
AU




                  accuracy, loss, and ERS across different learning rates.
                  As shown in Figure 1, lower learning rates (1e−4 and 5e−4 ) result in smoother convergence of
                  training and validation accuracy, and a steady decrease in training loss. The ERS remains more stable
                  for these learning rates, suggesting enhanced robustness to environmental variability. In contrast,       Comment:
Comment:          higher learning rates lead to overfitting and unstable loss patterns, with significant fluctuations in    only in this
The figure        ERS scores. These results indicate that optimizing hyperparameters like learning rate is crucial for      specific con-
seems to sug-     improving model generalization and robustness in real-world settings.                                     dition and
gest the lower                                                                                                              definition of
lr group over-                                                                                                              environmental
fits more                                                           2                                                       robustness
                    AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                    Figure 1: Baseline model performance across learning rates. Aggregated training and validation ac-




                    -V AT
                    curacy, training loss, and Environmental Robustness Score (ERS) over epochs for different learning
                    rates. Lower learning rates yield higher validation accuracy and more stable ERS scores, indicating
                    better generalization and robustness.




                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
           CI G W!!
         IS L E N
        A S P IO
                R
      E OUPA T
              Y
             U
    TH M IS A
           C




                    Figure 2: Comparison of training and validation accuracy across different datasets. Models trained
                    on EuroSAT and CIFAR-10 exhibit stable and high accuracy, whereas the model trained on MedM-
Comment:            NIST shows erratic accuracy patterns, indicating challenges in generalization due to domain dis-
Should ex-          crepancies.
        H




plain that this
is more about
generalization
 BY N T




from ImageNet       5.2   C HALLENGES IN M ULTI -DATASET T RAINING
to EuroSAT,
      O




MedMNIST, or        To investigate model generalization across different domains, we trained the ResNet-18 model on
CIFAR.
                    additional datasets: EuroSAT, MedMNIST, and CIFAR-10. Figure 2 presents the comparison of
                    training and validation accuracy across these datasets.
                    From Figure 2, the models trained on EuroSAT and CIFAR-10 achieve high and stable training and
   TO




                    validation accuracy over epochs, suggesting effective learning and better generalization. In contrast,
Comment: a          the MedMNIST model displays fluctuating accuracy, highlighting difficulties in adapting to the pest
stretched ar-       detection task. This suggests that significant domain shifts can negatively impact learning, leading
gument. Diffi-      to overfitting and decreased robustness.
culty of adopt-
AU




ing ResNet-         To further examine the robustness of these models, we analyzed the ERS across epochs, as shown
18 to MedM-         in Figure 3.
NIST doesn’t
immediately         Figure 3 illustrates that the models trained on EuroSAT and CIFAR-10 maintain higher ERS scores
suggest it’s        across epochs, suggesting robustness to environmental augmentations applied during testing. The          Comment:
also difficult to   MedMNIST model’s low ERS scores indicate vulnerability to such changes, underscoring the chal-           Should refer to
adapting to the     lenges posed by domain differences. These findings highlight the varying impact of dataset charac-       Appendix B,
pest detection      teristics on model generalization and robustness. While multi-dataset training and domain adapta-        as it provides
task. At least
it needs more                                                                                                                more detailed
explanation.                                                                                                                 information on
                                                                      3                                                      the noise used
                   AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                    -V AT
                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
Comment:

           CI G W!!
The legend can
                   Figure 3: Environmental Robustness Score (ERS) comparison across different datasets. The Eu-
                   roSAT and CIFAR-10 models maintain higher and more stable ERS scores, indicating better ro-
         IS L E N
be improved        bustness to environmental variability. The MedMNIST model shows low and unstable ERS scores,
                   reflecting sensitivity to environmental changes.
        A S P IO
                R
                   tion can offer potential improvements, they also present challenges, such as increased computational
                   demands and inconsistent performance gains, which must be carefully managed.
      E OUPA T
              Y
             U


                   6   D ISCUSSION
    TH M IS A



                   Our experiments reveal significant challenges in deploying deep learning models for pest detection
                   in real-world agricultural settings. Optimizing hyperparameters like learning rates enhances model
                   generalization and robustness to some extent, as evidenced by the improved performance and stable
           C




                   ERS scores at lower learning rates. However, models still struggle with environmental variabil-
                   ity, indicating that hyperparameter optimization alone is insufficient to achieve robust real-world
                   performance.

Comment:           The exploration of multi-dataset training provides valuable insights into domain adaptation chal-
        H




This can be        lenges. The varying performance across datasets underscores the importance of dataset selection and
misleading,        the potential pitfalls of naively combining datasets with different characteristics. The model’s poor   Comment:
since multi-       performance on MedMNIST suggests that significant domain shifts can negatively impact learning,         This only
 BY N T




dataset training   leading to overfitting and decreased robustness.
could mean a                                                                                                               makes sense
      O




model trained                                                                                                              if “combining”
                   These findings emphasize the need for specialized strategies to address data quality issues and envi-
on multiple                                                                                                                refers to Ima-
datasets, but      ronmental variability. Data augmentation techniques that more accurately reflect real-world condi-
                                                                                                                           geNet pretrain-
here multiple      tions, robust training methods, and domain-specific model adaptations may be necessary to improve
                                                                                                                           ing followed
models are         model performance in practical applications.
                                                                                                                           by fine-tuning
trained, where
   TO




each model is                                                                                                              on a different
trained on a       7   C ONCLUSION                                                                                         dataset, but it
single dataset                                                                                                             usually gives
                   Our study highlights critical pitfalls in deploying deep learning models for pest detection in real-    the impression
                                                                                                                           that the model
AU




                   world agricultural settings. While optimizing hyperparameters like learning rates can enhance model
                   generalization and robustness, challenges remain due to environmental variability and domain dis-       is trained
                   crepancies. Multi-dataset training introduces additional complexities, and its benefits depend on the   on multiple
                   compatibility of the datasets involved. Future work should focus on developing advanced techniques      datasets.
                   tailored to real-world conditions, such as improved data augmentation strategies that mimic environ-
                   mental changes, robust training methods that enhance model resilience, and architectures designed
                   for adaptability. By addressing these challenges, we can move closer to deploying reliable AI tools
                   in precision agriculture that are resilient to real-world variability.


                                                                    4
    AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




    R EFERENCES
    Ismael M. Abdulkareem, Faris K. Al-Shammri, Noor Aldeen A. Khalid, and Natiq A. Omran. Pro-
      posed approach for object detection and recognition by deep learning models using data augmen-
      tation. Int. J. Online Biomed. Eng., 20:31–43, 2024.
    Guy Amir, Osher Maayan, Tom Zelazny, Guy Katz, and Michael Schapira. Verifying the general-




                       2 ED
      ization of deep learning to out-of-distribution domains. ArXiv, abs/2406.02024, 2024.
    Jiangfeng Hu. Application of deep learning in smart agriculture research. Applied and Computa-
       tional Engineering, 2023.




                    -V AT
    Raj Kumar, Dinesh Singh, A. Chug, and A. Singh. Evaluation of deep learning based resnet-50
      for plant disease classification with stability analysis. In International Conference Intelligent
      Computing and Control Systems, pp. 1280–1287, 2022.
    A. Li, Elisa Bertino, Rih-Teng Wu, and Ting Wu. Building manufacturing deep learning models




                  ST R
                TI NE S
      with minimal and imbalanced training data using domain adaptation and data augmentation. 2023
      IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), pp. 1–8, 2023a.




             EN E A
           CI G W!!
    Manzhou Li, Siyu Cheng, Jingyi Cui, Changxiang Li, Zeyu Li, Chang Zhou, and Chunli Lv. High-
         IS L E N
     performance plant pest and disease detection based on model ensemble with inception module
     and cluster algorithm. Plants, 12, 2023b.
        A S P IO
    M. Mustakim, Aditya Rezky Pratama, Imam Ahmad, Teguh Arifianto, Kelik Sussolaikah, and Sepri-
                R
     ano Sepriano. Image classification of corn leaf diseases using cnn architecture resnet-50 and data
     augmentation. In 2024 International Conference on Decision Aid Sciences and Applications
     (DASA), pp. 1–6, 2024.
      E OUPA T


    Pulicherla Siva Prasad and Senthilrajan Agniraj. Cross-domain adaptation techniques for robust
              Y
             U


      plant disease detection: A dann-coral hybrid approach. International Journal of Experimental
      Research and Review, 2024.
    TH M IS A



    A. Teixeira, José Ribeiro, R. Morais, J. Sousa, and António Cunha. A systematic review on auto-
      matic insect detection using deep learning. Agriculture, 2023.
           C




    S UPPLEMENTARY M ATERIAL
        H




    A    A DDITIONAL F IGURES AND D ETAILED R ESULTS
 BY N T




    We provide additional figures and detailed results to supplement the main text. These figures offer
    deeper insights into the models’ behaviors under different experimental conditions.
      O




    Figure 4 shows that the EuroSAT and CIFAR-10 models show consistent decreases in training loss,
    reflecting effective learning. The MedMNIST model’s erratic loss suggests that the model struggles
    to minimize the loss function, possibly due to significant differences between medical images and
    agricultural pest images.                                                                             Comment:
   TO




                                                                                                          This should
                                                                                                          be ImageNet
    B    I MPLEMENTATION D ETAILS                                                                         images
    All models were implemented using PyTorch 1.9.0. The ResNet-18 architecture was initialized
AU




    with ImageNet pretrained weights. For optimization, we used the Adam optimizer with β1 = 0.9,
    β2 = 0.999, and a weight decay of 1e−4 . No learning rate schedules or gradient clipping were         Comment:
    applied.                                                                                              weight decay
                                                                                                          is 0.01 instead
    Data augmentations for simulating challenging conditions included ColorJitter with brightness
                                                                                                          of 1e−4 .
    and contrast factors of 0.5, GaussianBlur with a kernel size of 3, and RandomAffine transfor-
    mations with degrees up to 15 and translation up to 10%. These augmentations were applied during
    testing to evaluate the Environmental Robustness Score (ERS).


                                                    5
                   AI Scientist-v2 Generated Preprint




                       2 ED
                    -V AT
                  ST R
                TI NE S
             EN E A
           CI G W!!Figure 4: Comparison of training loss across different datasets. Models trained on EuroSAT and
                   CIFAR-10 datasets demonstrate a steady decrease in loss, while the model trained on MedMNIST
         IS L E N
                   exhibits erratic loss curves, indicating instability during training due to domain mismatch.
        A S P IO
                R
      E OUPA T
              Y
             U
    TH M IS A




                   Figure 5: Performance metrics for the model trained on MedMNIST dataset. The erratic behavior
           C




                   in accuracy and loss indicates challenges in model convergence and generalization when applying
Comment:           the MedMNIST dataset to pest detection tasks.
This state-
ment is in-
correct again.     The Environmental Robustness Score (ERS) is defined as:
It should say
        H




something                                            Accuracy under challenging conditions
like ”...apply-                              ERS =                                                                  (1)
                                                      Accuracy under normal conditions
ing/using the
 BY N T




MedMNIST           This metric quantifies the model’s robustness to environmental changes by comparing its perfor-
      O




dataset with       mance under augmented test sets to that under standard conditions.
the ImageNet-
pretrained         The additional datasets used for multi-dataset training were:
model.” Also,
the figure isn’t         • EuroSAT: A dataset consisting of 27,000 labeled Sentinel-2 satellite images covering 10
mentioned in
                           classes (?).
   TO




the main text.
                         • MedMNIST: A collection of lightweight medical image datasets covering various tasks
                           (?).
                         • CIFAR-10: A well-known dataset consisting of 60,000 32x32 color images in 10 classes
AU




                           (?).

                   For the multi-dataset training, we used a batch size of 64 to accommodate the increased data volume.
                   Training was conducted for 30 epochs, and early stopping was applied if validation loss did not
                   decrease for 5 consecutive epochs.




                                                                    6
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.3.2. AI Scientist Team Review
Paper Summary This paper studies the application of Deep Learning models for a real-world
application to pest prediction. It introduces an Environmental Robustness Score that leverages various
data augmentation techniques, mimicking environmental factors affecting data collection. It compares
various learning rates and compares the impact of out-of-distribution testing settings across non-pest
vision datasets.

Strengths
   • The paper fits the ICBNB workshop topic especially well. It discusses a real-world application of
     Deep Learning methods to pest prediction.
   • Understanding the differential impact of training and out-of-distribution data augmentation
     technique settings across datasets is interesting.

Weaknesses
   • The paper refers to domain adaptation being studied multiple times. The experiments, on
     the other hand, only investigate the usage of data augmentation methods (such as lighting,
     blurring, and contrast manipulation). Furthermore, studying the impact of the learning rate on
     generalization is fairly trivial.
   • It is hard to motivate that the Eurosat, Medmnist, and CIFAR-10 results are related to the pest
     prediction problem. Why should a result on these datasets transfer to pest prediction?
   • Some of the statements regarding multi-dataset training are misleading. There are no results
     in the paper that result from such a training setup. Instead, multiple models are trained on
     individual datasets.

Scores
   • Soundness: 2 fair. ⇒ Interesting research question with potentially simple empirical evaluation
     setup.
   • Presentation: 1 poor. ⇒ Wrong description and duplication of figures. Missing citation and
     downplaying of related work.
   • Contribution: 1 poor. ⇒ While the question considered is important, the displayed results do
     not provide enough evidence for the conclusions drawn.
   • Overall - Workshop: 3/10 (Reject): For instance, a paper with technical flaws, weak evaluation,
     inadequate reproducibility and incompletely addressed ethical considerations.
   • Overall - Conference: 2/10: (Strong reject): For instance, a paper with major technical flaws,
     and/or poor evaluation, limited impact, poor reproducibility and mostly unaddressed ethical
     considerations.
   • Confidence: 4/5. You are confident in your assessment, but not absolutely certain. It is unlikely,
     but not impossible, that you did not understand some parts of the submission or that you are
     unfamiliar with some pieces of related work.

Additional Comments
   • The presentation of the results needs significant improvement. There are multiple missing cita-
     tions (?), and the interpretation of the results can be misleading. This includes the conclusions
     with regard to the impact of a lower learning rate on overfitting or naming the multi-model-
     single-dataset experiment “mulit-dataset”.

Potential Violation of Code of Ethics: No.


                                                                                                                       65
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



C.3.3. AI Scientist Team Code Review
Domain Adaptation and Multi-dataset training
The paper seems to describe the “Domain Adaptation” experiment as primarily focused on trans-
ferring ImageNet-pretrained models to other vision datasets. After reviewing the code, we found
attempts to implement a domain adaptation technique by training a separate classifier to distinguish
different domains, but these attempts were unsuccessful. In the end, the AI Scientist opted for an
implementation that does not include this domain adaptation technique.
Moreover, in the code where this domain adaptation technique was implemented, multi-dataset
training was correctly performed as well–training a single model on all three datasets with domain
discriminator loss, as shown in fig. 11. Had this code run successfully, the AI Scientist would likely
have chosen it over the one ultimately selected, which lacked proper multi-dataset training but ran
without errors.




Figure 11 | Domain discriminator and multi-dataset training loop.


Environmental noise implementation
The paper states, “To simulate challenging environmental conditions, we applied data augmentations
during testing, including brightness and contrast adjustments, Gaussian blur, and random affine
transformations.” This is confirmed in the code, as shown in fig. 12.
The calculation of the Environmental Robustness Score–a metric introduced by the AI Scientist and
defined as “the ratio of model accuracy under challenging conditions to that under normal conditions,
to quantify robustness”–matches the description in the paper, as shown in fig. 13.




                                                                                                                       66
              Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




Figure 12 | Environment noise simulation implementation.




Figure 13 | Environmental Robustness Score calculation.


C.3.4. Workshop Reviews
   Reviewer #1: Review of Real-World Challenges in Pest Detection Using Deep Learning: An Investigation
   into Failures and Solutions.
   Summary
   This paper studies deep learning methods in pest detection applications. It highlights the need
   for more research and attempts to perform first experiments in this area.

   Results
   The paper performs experiments on an image classifier, a ResNet-18 trained on ImageNet, fine-
   tuned on the Crop Pest and Disease dataset. It uses various data augmentations to emulate the
   real-world conditions and further trains the model using "multi-dataset training". The model
   performance is measured in accuracy, loss, and Environmental Robustness Score (ERS). The first
   experiment investigates the effect tuning the learning rate has on training. The paper claims
   that a lower learning rate leads to a higher generalisation. The second experiment investigates




                                                                                                                       67
          Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search



the model's generalisation across different datasets. The paper claims that training the model on
EuroSAT and CIFAR-10 datasets leads to better generalisation.

Strengths
The paper's background, motivation, and related work are well written. The motivation to study
generalisation of deep learning methods in real-world agricultural applications is good.

Weaknesses
- The experiments are unmotivated and unclear.
- It is unclear how the choice of augmentation methods are related to "real-world environmental
variability."
- The choice of ERS is unmotivated and no intuition on the score is given in the paper.
- The learning rate experiment conclusion that the model's generalization and robustness to real-
world setting seems misleading since only 5 learning rates are used and the models are only
trained for 10 epochs. Furthermore, the model was not tested in a real-world deployment.
It is unclear what the paper means by "multi-dataset training" especially since the datasets have
a different number of classes. Thus, the results of this experiment are unclear.
- The paper claims to have studied "deploying deep learning models for pest detection in real-
world agricultural settings", however, the paper does not test the trained model in a real-world
setting. Thus, the paper's conclusions are misleading.

General Remarks
- In the introduction, the difference between "controlled environment" and "real-world
agricultural settings" should be explained since the experiments are not performed in a real-
world deployment.
- Plots are small and difficult to read. Increasing the font size would help as well.
- In Figure 1, it would be helpful if the Train and Validation lines for the same learning rate
were the same colour.
- In Figure 1, it is unclear whether the ERS scores are evaluated on the train or validation
dataset.
- Unclear why the results in Figure 4 are pushed to the appendix and not combined with Figure 2
similar to Figure 1.
- References to the datasets are missing, e.g., the Crop Pest and Disease dataset.

Concluding Remarks
Overall, the paper addresses an interesting real-world problem. However, the lack of detail in
the experiment section limits the strength of the conclusions, as the experimental results are
not sufficiently supported by evidence. In its current state, it is of the reviewer's opinion
that the paper does not meet the standard for publication. The authors are encouraged to further
develop this research and consider deploying the model in a real-world setting to strengthen the
validity of their findings.

Rating: 3: Clear rejection
Award: No Award
Confidence: 4: The reviewer is confident but not absolutely certain that the evaluation is correct


Reviewer #2: Review "REAL-WORLD CHALLENGES IN PEST DETECTION USING DEEP LEARNING: AN
INVESTIGATION INTO FAILURES AND SOLUTIONS"
Summary: The authors investigate deep learning models in the context of pest detection. They
state that common deep learning models work well in theoretical settings but struggle to
generalize when being exposed to environmental changes. In addition, they offer potential
approaches to address these issues and increase robustness of deep learning models in pest
detection.

Scientific Rigor and Transparency: Yes, the authors conducted several experiments to underline
their findings.

Novelty and Significance: Yes, the paper highlights the weaknesses of deep learning models in
pest detection by analyzing how multi-dataset training and hyperparameter tuning affect their
performance and ability to generalize.

Clarity of Writing: Yes, the paper is generally well-structured and written in a nice way.
However, the paper could still improve on clarity by adding the missing references marked with a
(?) in Section 3.

Alignment with Workshop Topics: Yes, the paper aligns with the theme of the workshop.




                                                                                                                   68
           Th e A I Sc i e n t i s t - v 2: Workshop-Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree Search




Additional Comments: The submitted paper provides insights into the weaknesses of deep learning
models in real-world pest detection scenarios. It proposes strategies to mitigate these issues
through hyperparameter tuning and multi-dataset training. While these methods can enhance model
performance in practical applications, challenges persist due to environmental variability and
domain discrepancies. I recommend that the authors include additional references in the field of
pest detection, such as "Crop Pest Recognition in Real Agricultural Environments Using
Convolutional Neural Networks with a Parallel Attention Mechanism" by Zhao et al., to offer a
more comprehensive perspective on the topic.

Rating: 7: Good paper, accept
Award: No Award
Confidence: 3: The reviewer is fairly confident that the evaluation is correct


Reviewer #3: Critical Review of Real-World Challenges in Pest Detection Using Deep Learning: Method-
ological and Theoretical Considerations

The presented paper discusses challenges in pest detection based on digital images using the
ResNet-18 model. The authors discuss experiments to evaluate the variability of classification
performance based on simulated environmental changes. This topic is relevant, given major
challenges such as biodiversity loss. Furthermore, the importance of interdisciplinary research
(in this case, data science and biology) will increase, and such studies will help accelerate the
use of machine learning in life sciences. However, I found shortcomings in this study, which I
summarize in the text below.

The introduction provides a good overview of why this work is important. However, the technical
motivation is not clear. A clear motivation based on the theoretical aspects of ‘generalization’
(see [1,2]), as well as a clear statement including literature on challenges in ‘AI’ in
agriculture, would have been necessary.

The methodology section should refer to the appendix for more details (there are important
details in the appendix). Furthermore, dataset details (e.g., example images, how many disease-
related images are there?) are missing. The hypothesis concerning the learning rate, as well as
augmentation to simulate real environmental variability, is not well motivated. I believe this
harsh simulation of real-life dynamics should have been introduced in the abstract and
introduction (it would still be an interesting study!). The motivation and derivation of the ERS
are missing (is it an ad hoc approach?). The metric is prone to over/underestimating robustness
due to unbalanced datasets (see the equation, and using the definition of accuracy, the size of
the datasets influences the fraction). Based on the missing training/test/validation details
above, it is unclear whether bias is introduced. Furthermore, I do not think that such studies
must rely on the newest models. However, ResNet-18 is a rather old model, and no justification
for selecting this model is given. A comparison to transformer-based architectures would have
been interesting.

Finally, there are some language issues and BibTeX errors (see ‘?’). The figures should be
updated to increase readability. Considering my discussion above, I think the results are still
interesting. However, I do believe that the presentation must be adapted. I recommend a major
revision, including a solid theoretical foundation, a presentation of the evaluation strategy
using augmentation throughout the manuscript, and a comparison to recent deep learning models.
Furthermore, I recommend switching from augmentation to real datasets or generative models. With
these improvements, the impact of this study would be increased significantly.

[1] Wolpert, D.H. (2002). The Supervised Learning No-Free-Lunch Theorems. In: Soft Computing and
Industry. Springer, London. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-0123-9_3 [2] Goldblum, M. et al.
(2024). Position: The No Free Lunch Theorem, Kolmogorov Complexity, and the Role of Inductive
Biases in Machine Learning. Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning

Rating: 4: Ok but not good enough - rejection
Award: No Award
Confidence: 4: The reviewer is confident but not absolutely certain that the evaluation is
correct




                                                                                                                    69
